SPEAKER 0
OK, hi.

SPEAKER 1
Good afternoon. Um, I'd like to start, uh, with some logistics around the tutorials. So just that, you know, um, we had to move the time of one of the groups on Thursday, so there were two groups scheduled for Thursday 1 p.m. And one of those groups will be or uh should have been moved already on the timetable to 2 o'clock. So if you are so, so. Maybe a good idea to just check what group you're assigned to. If you cannot make that group anymore, then put in a request to change your group and if it doesn't work out for you this week, then just go to any of the other groups that are available, OK? So, um, I don't know if the timetable has updated already or if that happens overnight so I heard this morning that change has been implemented so hopefully that's gonna be OK for everyone but as as I said, as we said before you can um. You can change your group and if a group doesn't work out for you just go to any of the other ones. There's attendance monitoring so if you don't turn up to your assigned group, just tell the tutor, send the tutor an email that you're going to a different one and they will take attendance, OK? So if you, if you have any problems with that, just let me know and we'll try to fix it. Hopefully this is all set up now. Right, OK. Also, um, the lab notebooks, uh, should be available now on, uh, on Notable for you. So hopefully you can, you can see those and download those and, and try working with them. I saw there was a message on Piazza. I'm gonna respond to that later, but basically these notebooks contain Python code and oftentimes what's further, further down in the notebook will depend on code that's further up so. When you um start working on a notebook, make sure that you run everything all the way down to the point where you want to make a change. What's happening in these notebooks is that there's a, there's an interpreter in the background that just sequentially runs through everything that you're, you're running. So when you execute a cell, that code will be run, and the interpreter will then continue from there, OK? So that was the question I saw on Piazza. I'll, I'll write something about that later. Good. So, um, so this week, uh, we are going to cover some very basic neuroscience. Um, so we're starting with the brain today on Thursday, I will tell you about how neurons function and then on Friday we'll talk about how we can model the brain. So we're coming from the bottom up here. Um, we get to talk a little bit about cognitive processes, cognitive phenomena, but this is really to give you a, uh, primarily to give you a grounding in neuroscience. Uh, neuroscience is a complicated and and huge field, and what I'm. Gonna do here is I will present you some of the key concepts that you need to understand in order to be able to follow um. What we're gonna cover later on in the course. So what you find on the slides are basically those concepts and facts and the knowledge that you need and in the lectures I will try to give you some additional context around those. If you want to read um the something which is more sort of coherent and has more detail, then go to the readings that are linked up from the week to uh course website the two. Chapters from textbooks that give you an overview of the topic. Um, there's a lot more detail in there than what we expect you to know in this course, but if you're interested, um, feel free to dig in there. um, this is all, all relevant. Good. So, um, so today we have 3 topics. Um, first, I'll get you, give you an idea of the basic anatomy of the human brain. Then we will focus in on a part of the brain called the cortex, which is the part of the brain that is implicated in higher cognition. So the phenomena we're mostly interested in in this course. And then finally I'll talk a bit about connections between different parts of the brain and why they matter and why we need to worry about those. So, um, let's begin with a brain, with a human brain. So just some basic facts here. So we have approximately around about 90 billion neurons in our brain. Neurons are electrically active cells that talk to each other um in mostly a chemical way, and how that works we will learn them on Thursday, um, but you can basically view that as the substrate in which everything that our brain does happens. Now neurons are connected. They talk to each other, and we have approximately, this is a very rough estimate in the order of 100 trillion connections between our neurons. So this is an almost sort of meaninglessly high number, but that's that's what underlies cognition. Um, interesting side note, and we will come back to this, um, towards the end of the lecture, is that the African elephant, for instance, happens to have many more neurons than we do. Um, so they have 300 billion neurons and, uh, why, why that matters, how that matters, um, we will see towards the end. So, on this picture here, you, you see in the um Scan of a brain that's an MRI scan, uh, which shows you the anatomy. So I guess you've all seen that kind of thing before. Um, so this is what we consider the brain, but in fact the brain also includes the spinal cord which goes down here through our neck and then further down the body. So that's in terms of biology, that's also a part of the brain. Um, and that's where the connections happen to the rest of the body. Now your brains are gonna weigh somewhere between 1.2 and 1.5 kilogrammes, so that's roughly in the order of 2% of our body mass. Um, but, uh, despite being a relatively small part of our body, it consumes about 20% of the energy that we expend. So, um From an evolutionary point of view that's quite interesting because energy expenditure in evolution is always a big constraint, right? So, um, energy expenditure is very tightly controlled. There's a lot in our bodies that makes sure that we expend energy in an efficient way and so spending 20% of our energy on one organ means something. Um, it's also interesting to compare that to our computers once again. So this computer here, I would expect runs on maybe currently just showing the slides maybe on 10 or 15 watts or something like that. Um, our brain runs on roughly 20 watts. So that is something like 2 LED light bulbs just illuminating a room. So the brain is incredibly energy efficient. Um, for what it does compared to anything that we can build with technology currently. Right. And that's what we're trying to understand in in cognitive science. So an easy task. And, as I said, the brain includes The tissue in our inside our heads and also the spinal cord, and then we have a second system which is called the peripheral nervous system. Um, and this connects the brain up to the muscles, um, so this makes us, allows us to move. Um, but not only that, there are so-called ganglia. These are small systems of neurons, groups of neurons of cell bodies distributed across our body, for example, in the digestive system. That pick up signals from all sorts of places and transmit that information back to the brain and they not only do that, they also autonomously control some aspects of our body function. So when we talk about about how neurons control our control us, basically we have to include this peripheral system, which is a more sort of autonomous system as well. But what we are focusing on here. Is the brain as the site of higher cognition. Um, So If we look at a schematic of our brain or even a brain scan, we can clearly see that there are anatomical subdivisions by just looking at it from a structural point of view. And The area that we're going to be most interested in is the cortex. The cortex is this structure which surrounds the whole brain. It's, it's a highly convoluted. Structure, um, and, uh, as a result, it has a relatively high surface area. So in other species, uh, mammalian species, say, um, for instance, rodents like mice, the brain is relatively flat. It's, it's not convoluted. It's, it's more like a flat surface. And as you go up, uh, uh. To to animals which are capable of higher cognitive function, you find more of this convoluted structure. Um, So in this picture here, you can see different parts of the brain which are situated underneath the cortex. And those are typically parts of the brain which are evolutionarily older, so you find these more prominent in species that are evolutionarily more distant to us and primates. So for instance, um, obviously there's the spinal cord that we all, all mammals have which, as I said, sends signal signals out to the body and receives sensory information from the body. But we got also um structures, large structures such as the midbrain here. We got a, a, a very important structure called the cerebellum. Cerebellum means something like small brain, um, and we'll we'll get to all of these structures uh as we go through the course and we, we look at different modalities, different cognitive functions, and so on. Um, you might have heard about that there's grey and white matter. You can see this in a, in, in by just looking at a slice of brain. Um, white matter contains connections between different parts of the brain, so they're the kind of the wiring that connects up to the brain. There are no cell bodies in white matter. It is uh structures called axons, so we'll learn more about that on, on Thursday. And the grey matter, which actually in a living brain is more pink matter, this is where the cell bodies are, where the actual neurons are, um, and where the connections are both happening locally between neurons in the vicinity, but also then long connections through white matter tracts to other parts of the brain. Um, so in this picture again, you can, you can see the cortex surrounding it. So this is a view from the top, um. Cut like this and uh you can see those various structures within the brain that I told you are the evolutionary older ones. Um There's a, there's a, there's a strong symmetry in the brain, so we got these two hemispheres, left and right. And anatomically they look very, very similar to each other and they are connected um through a bundle of fibres called the corpus callosum. Now it turns out here we get a first glimpse of um anatomical specialisation in the brain. Turns out that there's a difference in terms of function of what these two hemispheres are doing and the sort of colloquial view of that is that the left hemisphere is more responsible for analytical task. Speech and language areas are situated there and The right hemisphere is more important for retrieval and maintenance of, of information, um, so, um. Things like for instance map reading one also could claim that maybe the right hemisphere is more the creative part of the brain, whereas the left hemisphere is a bit more the analytical part of the brain. That's what I don't know, you might hear in popular science podcasts, um, and those connections between those two hemispheres are quite important. So people who lack this connection actually. Um, have some deficits in some brain functions. So for instance, in, in, in learning, uh, certain tasks. There is actually a surgery that is done very rarely, uh, where people who have Epilepsy that doesn't respond to any other treatment that is caused by um by those fibres, so it's usually possible to locate where seizure activity originates from and this might happen in the corpus callosum or through these fibres in the corpus callosum. And in those patients, uh, the last resort is to cut the corpus callosum. And so there's a small, small number of people on the on the planet who have this this communication between the two halves of the brain, more or less completely severed. They're called split brain patients, and they've been intensively studied because they give a window into what it means to not have these two parts of the brain talk to each other. And So I just briefly mentioned this because you might see this, uh, all these terms, uh, when you read neuroscience publications, textbooks. So, um, there's a number of terms that are used for as, as anatomical references in medicine in general. So many of these terms are not just brain uh related but are used to, um, as, as reference points for um bodies in general. So maybe I'll point out a few. Um, so on this picture here on the left, you see an arrow pointing to the top that says dorsal and something that is dorsal means it's on the, on the back. So you might know the dorsal fin of a, of a fish. That's a fin uh sitting on the back of the animal. And then conversely, if something is in the front, it's called ventral. And brain areas are often named after, after these um these references so um we have a ventral pathway for example in the visual system that we're going to talk about later and that's just named after where it's located relative to other parts um of the cortex so then um. We have anterior, which is to the front. So, so if you imagine a dog, anterior is pointing where the snout is, and then posterior is pointing where the tail is, OK. Um, then we have medial that just means in the middle, and everything that's not medial, but away from the medial is called lateral. So lateral means to the sides. And we've got some more listed here on the right, so superior just means above. So we have a structure called the superior colliculus that sits above some other brain structure, inferiors below. Proximal means close by and distal, as I said, means away. So a neuron might have proximal um neuros coming out of it. Those are the ones close to the cell body and then distal ones are going away. Um, and then we have reference points which relate to certain parts of anatomy. So for instance, we might, uh, talk about the temporal lobe. Um, you might have a temporal lobe epilepsy. Now, temporal here means just near the temporal bone, OK? Or parietal, um, we have a parietal cortex that means near the parietal bone. And occipital, that's the occipital bone, right? So all this is, this is what anatomists came up with uh to describe uh the anatomy of the head and the brain and everything else. So don't, no need to remember all of these, but basically nowhere to look them up if you want to ever find out what, what's meant by them, OK? So, um. This This is just a quick sort of overview in case you come across these terms. Good. Um, now, brains obviously have very different sizes, uh, because, as you, as you know, tiny creatures, and we have us and we have the elephants. Now, there's an interesting observation that's a very tight relationship between, um, the body mass of a species, the average body mass, and the average weight of the brain. Um, so you see here it's a linear relationship. So, um. The bigger the heavier the animal, the bigger and heavier the brain will be. And again, we'll get back to that sooner. So what that might imply is because we think bigger is better, more is better, well. Maybe the elephants should be better than us if they have such big brains. We'll see. To what extent that's the case in a bit. OK, so let's then go to the cortex, or are there any questions at this point on the general brain anatomy? Does that make sense so far? It's basically knowledge, yes.

SPEAKER 2
silly question, but back to your the front It said the bottom and the back.

SPEAKER 1
So this, this one here. So, well, you would probably say that. So, so eyes, well, they're for us, they're anterior because you, you need to, you need to, you need to basically look up. Um, so you need to align your body, right? And, and our body makes a little curve. So think of the dog. The dog's eyes are on the anterior part of the body, right? So that's the front facing bit, so to speak. We are, well, we, we're a bit special because we are bipedal mostly. So for us that you have to, you have to sort of make the turn with our head. If we were walking on four legs, we would be looking ahead with our anterior part of the face, OK? So I think I don't know exactly where these come from, but they certainly come from anatomists studying and describing animals rather than humans. Noting that there are these similarities across many species. OK, um, good. Any, any more, yep.

SPEAKER 3
I do all fe Same size frames like or.

SPEAKER 1
Sorry, all humans have the same brain. So our brains do grow, yes, so we're not born with the finished brain. There's there's neurogenesis happening and our brains grow as our skull grows. There's more fitting in. I mean, If you're asking, well, between individuals there is some variability. um, I'm not aware of really quantifications of that. I know that a tiny part of the brain that I have worked on a lot is the retina, so that's the the neurons in the back of our eyes which make us allow us to see and there's quite a large variability between even how many cells we have in our retinas, right? So. Nevertheless, we all are able to see the same way, right? Whether what the reasons are. It's not known. Um, I think biology has a lot of slack when it comes to adapting to slightly different conditions and so on. So yeah That's the best I can, I can say about that. OK. Let's then, let's then talk about the cortex. So I said, the cortex is, uh, is responsible for. If you're listening now and thinking about what I'm saying and and and trying to understand it and this is this is your cortex being active. If you're drowsy and not really paying attention then. Probably your cortex isn't that involved in, in any of the other things that, that you might be, be doing at this time. Um, so, I wanna get an idea of how people have studied for a long time and in humans actually still are studying, um, uh, the function, function of, of different parts of the brain. And, um, the The oldest findings are all relate relating to autopsy and finding differences between individuals. So oftentimes these are people, individuals which had injuries in certain parts. So that would be postmortem. And then look at what behavioural deficits or differences there were when these people were alive um and this is actually a very old science so in uh in in in the Islamic world uh autopsies were allowed and so people did them and they started discovering these relationships between um. Certain phenotypes I would say just generally and certain uh uh differences in brains, mostly in injuries and the the the First World War was an area where a lot of progress was made because people had horrific head injuries and um in in all sorts of parts of the brain because military technologies had evolved a lot and so that is a lot of the foundational knowledge we have comes from this kind of dark. Dark ages of, of, of, of neuroscience. Of course now we have, we have much, we have different methods available to us as well. Um, the first studies of anatomy of brain anatomy at, at some detailed level were enabled by inventions such as the microscope and some other, um, technologies. So, uh, the, uh, Golgi and Cajal are two names you might, might have heard before, so. They discovered ways of staining brain tissue in order to make structures more visible under a light microscope and that led to what I'm going to talk about shortly, the classification of different brain areas and then of course. A bit later, the, the importance of electrical activity in the brain was discovered by um by the Galvani family and, and Aldini. And that together was was what was needed to kick off what what we would consider modern neuroscience where function and anatomy are studied together and that led to the current understanding that we have and now fortunately we have a lot of good noninvasive tools available to us to study brains in humans and I think on Friday next week I will give a lecture about different methods to record and measure brain activity. So, um, so when we look at the cortex, just structurally, You will see that there are some prominent landmarks, and these are very reproducible across people. And there is in fact a way of um so when, when, when you go and have your brain scanned, usually the first thing that's done is that that brain scan is then mapped onto a sort of reference brain that allows then finding different brain areas and so on. So each of our brains is slightly different, but we all have these structures and Um, different functions are always in roughly the same place. So There's a, there's a rough subdivision we can make of the cortex into a frontal lobe here. That's the front of the brain, and the temporal lobe, this one here at the temporal. Um, at the temples, and parietal lobe is this one here, and then the occipital is the back of the brain. So this is how the cortex is often subdivided and A little spoiler, but they are, they are actually different functions that are associated with these different parts of the brain. Again, just to mention it, we have a cerebellum here, small brain, important for. Learning timing is very important for learning movements and so on. Um, we have the spinal cord down here. What else do we see? That, that's about it. Everything else is, is covered up in this. Oh yeah, uh, OK. So, um As I said, um, so, so when the light microscope was available and the staining techniques were, were developed, self-staining techniques basically, it was quickly discovered that, um, the cortex doesn't have a sort of random or uniform architecture like you might see in, say, a liver. If that's not true, a liver has some structure to it, but there's a lot more structure than that. In the cortex and what we're seeing here are vertical sections through the cortex. So the cortex is kind of a sheet that is convoluted um. And can be, can be flattened out and if you then cut through this and visualise the cells, you see a kind of just by eyeballing this picture here you can see uh that there are different layered structures which have different. Densities of cell bodies in them. So, for example, in this layer. These layers are numbered, so in layer 3 and layer 5, we find many cell bodies. We find very few cell bodies and no cell bodies almost up in the in the in the superficial layers. So there is this kind of layered organisation in the cortex. And if we look at different parts of the human cortex, different, different, different locations of the human cortex, we always find this kind of layered structure, but there are. Differences. So sometimes certain layers are a little bit thicker in some place than they would be in another place. So while this overall structure into this, so, so in, in, in humans, we. We're talking usually about 5 or 6 layers of the cortex, that is reproducible across the whole cortex, but with fine differences depending on where you are. And this kind of layered organisation we also find in other mammal mammalian species. Sometimes these layers are less pronounced or even absent in some species, but a layered organisation is always present. Um So if you remember from last week, I told you about um the cognitive gadgets and haze and the ideas that maybe our brains are general learning machines and this is one of the origins of this idea. So we, we gonna see and people at that point in time did know that different parts of the cortex are responsible for different skills yet. At least anatomically there isn't a big difference between those different areas so maybe it is possible that this is a a general purpose architecture that can be repurposed in many different ways and so that's that's, that's where that idea orig originates from and that's still a a sort of valid um way of looking at at cortex organisation. Um Now, I said Beyond the rough separation into these broad broad areas such as frontal, parietal, um, occipital cortex, um, it turns out that, um, the cyto architecture as we go along the cortical surface, it, it varies in a very systematic way. And um an anatomist um over 100 years ago, Corbinian Brodman, Went must have been a huge amount of work to do this, but made all these drawings and went over the whole brain to define anatomically different areas based on how they looked like under the microscope. So he came up with um 52 distinct areas they're called Brodmann areas and the, the, the basic numbering scheme and the basic classification is still used today. And it turns out that yes, these, these are distinct areas and they have a functional relevance so um different parts have different functions so it's indicated in this picture maybe I can, I can quickly go over this already so we find for instance um area 6 here is labelled as remote area. And we now know that this is an area that is very important for planning movements. So if this area is damaged, we would be very bad at at performing and planning and executing a skilled movement, right? Now here area 4 is the principal motor area. So if that's damaged, then we really have problems performing any kind of movement because that actually controls the movements and tries to correct for mistakes in movements that we might make and so on. Totally different one here at the back we have Area 17. We're gonna get back to that quite intensively when we talk about vision. So that's the primary visual cortex, and that's an area that we need in order to have conscious conscious visual perception. And so on. So you can, you can look through this here in the temporal lobe we have auditory cortex, so that's you're using that to listen to me at the moment and so on. Um, Just a quick mention, so there is, um, so this, this. Broadman area specification is extremely well established. A lot of data has been collected, and one of the big efforts that have been made in the last decade plus is by the Ellen Brain Institute in Seattle. So they have a website where you can browse through human brains, mouse brains, developing mouse brains, developing human brains. They annotated according to this Broadman or an updated version of this Broadman classification. And that is currently a sort of reference site or reference map for anybody who has to work with neural anatomy. So, um, So we basically have all these free resources available to us that were large collections of data that So what the Ellen Brain Institute also has done is now in addition to information about um about the anatomy, it includes information about activity in different brain areas so they add recordings, um, gene expression in different areas is, is quantified and so on and all of this is, is nicely presented in databases. So these are fantastic resources that every researcher working in this field is now using. Um, OK, so let's look at specific parts of the cortex. The sort of most mysterious and kind of coolest part of the brain is the frontal cortex. Um, this is the part of the brain that is mostly, most connected, most interconnected to all other parts of the cortex. So we have outgoing connections. To all across the other parts of the cortex, we have many outputs going through basal ganglia that's important for initiating movements, deciding what to do, a cerebellum, how to move, hypothalamus, you might have heard about that. That's important for controlling hormones. It's responsible for producing things like adrenaline, for instance. The thalamus is a kind of relay that coordinates communication between different parts of the cortex and the rest of the brain. Um, and so on, um, at the same time, the frontal cortex receives input from all over the brain, including, that's an area you might have heard of amygdala, um, so something that is in the in the podcasts that's tied to emotions and so on, right? Um, again, thalamus, hypothalamus, um, brain stem, very old part of the brain. So it seems to be an area that integrates everything that the brain does and sends the information back out again, and we know quite well from for a long time that the frontal cortex is is absolutely critical for what we call executive function. So executive function is a catch-all term for planning and guiding behaviour, um, behaviour switching, adaptation, and so on. So everything that's kind of the basis of more complex behaviour, complex reasoning, and so on. That is what, what executive behaviour is. Executive behaviour is what you need, you need this facility, for example, in order to cook. Some, um, a recipe to follow a, uh, a recipe, um, step by step. If your frontal brain is damaged, you will have problems following a recipe. You will forget what you already did. You will mix up things and so on. So it's this coordinating facility. Um, there's more to it. The frontal cortex has a role in social cognition. Um, some people might say it's even essential for consciousness. That's debated. We can maybe at the end of the course talk about that a little bit if you want to. But so this is where, this is, this is where people would say that's the site of our higher cognition, cognitive abilities. Um, here's some examples, um, of, um, the deficits that people have if they have frontal cortex damage. So these are all people who had, um, a tumour, uh, removed, uh, that was affecting the frontal cortex, and so some of that part that was missing and they basically had to follow a sequence of, um, instructions. So for example, the top one is they should draw a cross, then a circle, then a cross circle, cross circle, right? So that seems quite simple. So that patient wasn't able anymore to follow the, complete the sequence, was, was just producing crosses or here circle square, circle square ended up producing squares. And this is, this is just, yeah, there's no way these patients are able to complete the task even concentrating heavily. There's just something fundamental seems to be missing that allows, allows producing these, these outcomes. Now these, these are fairly extreme examples. But it can, it frontal cortex damage can be a lot more subtle. It's actually a big problem in diagnosis because sometimes the deficit might be extremely specific, um. So, um, In addition, I mean, so we've, we've started with higher order cognition. Now, what we, what our brain also needs to do is of course to be able to make sense out of the flood of sensory information that we're getting the whole time. Um, that includes vision, um, auditory information, um, somatosensory information that's touch olfactory information that's smell, and. Those sensory areas are sitting at the, mostly at the back and the temporal part of the brain, as I mentioned here in the occipital lobe, we have the visual cortex, um, the temporal lobe, auditory cortex, and there's a, there's a structure called olfactory bulb, which is responsible for, um, Uh, smell and then in the parietal region, um, there's, uh, touch, temperature, and so on. And interestingly, the parietal cortex is sitting next to the, to the motor cortex and so here's a little thing you can, you can easily experience yourself. So think about doing a fine motor task like yeah something extreme like threading a needle or something like that. And then you put on gloves and try to do the same task, and it will become very hard to do these tasks, and that is because you're cutting off the flow of information back directly from the Sumatosensory system from your fingers back to the to the to the Sumatosensory system that is very close and very highly interconnected with the motor system, so you have this kind of. Interrupted this this sort of flow of information that allows you to to produce um uh to to perform these skilled tasks and that what that shows us is that behaviour often is a kind of 11 should look at behaviour in terms of a closed loop so it's not like we're making a decision to do behaviour some switch. It turns in the brain and then we execute the behaviour, but behaviours are continuously monitored and and changed and adapted and so on and on a high level you need a you you you need um you need the frontal cortex for that when it comes to complex behaviours but on a lower level, even, even single tasks such as threading a needle, making a skilled movement, they are. Similarly involved involving this this closed loop um between sensation and then producing an action monitoring the outcome of an action predicting it and then reacting to what what's what's what what the actual observation tells you and adjusting. Um, here's the motor system. I said before, we have motor cortex as the key part, the cerebellum as a, as a critical part. We'll get back to that a little bit, um, and the spinal cord. Um, in addition, we have brain stem contributing. Um, and, um, so brain stem is mostly involved in the more sort of autonomous movement, so it regulates breathing and so on, but there are links between brain stem and the motor system as well, so you can actually to some extent predict from neural activity in the brain stem what type of movements say an animal is performing. Um An interesting feature that we will see again and again when we look at how things are sort of represented in the brain and we've talked about this representation idea, right? So the outside world is somehow represented in some way inside the brain in the activity of neurons that's here is this topological organisation. So along the motor cortex we see that there are different parts of the body. That each part of the motor cortex is responsible for, and we have a rough alignment of the body anatomy with the alignment on the motor cortex. So we're starting with the foot, we're going through the leg, the trunk here, then I'm actually making a big jump and we're moving over to the hand. Then we have a separate part here where the face and different facial muscles are represented and so on. The tongue is separate even. And the size of each of these parts of the body represent the number of neurons or the neural hardware that's dedicated to each of these parts of the body. And you can see in us, in humans, the hand is represented very, very strongly, equally the face. So what that means is that representation probably or the scale of a representation has something to do with the amount of control that we have, right? So, so obviously we can do much more with our hands than with our feet. It doesn't mean we can learn using our feet in sophisticated ways, but it's certainly harder because we have fewer neural hardware available for that. So the key principle here is this topological orientation, and we see that again in vision, for instance, and, and in other sensory systems as well. OK, so final topic, uh, is, um, the, um, connections between brain areas. Um, I mentioned the cerebellum. Here's another one that's interesting is the hippocampus. Um, we'll hear more about that when we get to learning of and memory because that's a structure that is absolutely critical for remembering pretty much anything, um. If you want to go to those videos, um, I think the hippocampus example is particularly interesting. So the cerebellum example is about, uh, um, patients with, uh, with, um. Um, damage to the cerebellum and how they're not able to perform certain skilled movements anymore and the hippocampus example is about somebody who had a hip hip large part of the hippocampus removed because of epilepsy and how that impairs with memory function. So we'll get back to the hippocampus in quite some detail later in the course. Now, brain connectivity, so this is about white matter. There's a lot of white matter inside our brain, so that's just cables between brain areas, not neurons actually performing a function, but just transmitting information. And this here is a picture of a so-called connectome. So this is the connectivity between all the different Brodmann areas that we have in our brain. And not worth going into detail here except realising that the, the, the, the connectivity is really very intense and every brain area talks to other brain areas. Very intensely. So, um, One could ask now, even if we had an intact brain, but if this connectivity was, was affected, um. What would that consequence of that be? And there's a, there's a famous example which is uh a poor railroad worker, um, Phineas gauge, um, so he, uh, He unfortunately had a tampering iron shot through his um his skull like this here, like seen here in this reconstruction. And um The description is pretty gruesome, so smeared with blood and brain. I mean this, this is an extremely serious injury, but apparently, I mean this is, you can read that in the physician's report, um, he says when I drove up he said, Doctor, here's some business enough for you. So the Phineas was still able to speak, was aware of his condition, um, but had a really significant part of his brain damaged now. How, how did he cope with that? Surprisingly well given the scale of the injury. Um, so there were, there were personality changes and so on, and that is it's not unexpected, but he lived on for another 12 years despite of this injury, and here we can see the inferred chic tone of Phineas gauge, so. In the right hemisphere here, we have almost all the connectivity severed. So compare that to this one. This is the full connectome. This is what we would like to have, and this is what we had. So what this points to, and this is a topic we will get to as well, is that the brain has this remarkable plasticity, right? So a brain is incredibly adaptable again speaks to the idea of cognitive gadgets. You can, you can, your brain is able to do to learn new things that it's not been made for. It can deal with very severe injuries and adapt to it and continue to function well. And this is probably the what this is one of the big differences if you think about technological artefacts like this, this laptop if I put a tampering iron through this laptop, then you wouldn't, you wouldn't be able to get anything out of it, right? Obviously. So any, any, any engineered device is, is not resilient in a sense that a biological system is and that is very fascinating and that has to do with plasticity and, and learning and we cover that later in the course. So finally, um, the elephant brain, let's get back to this. So we have more, um, we have fewer neurons than the elephant, so what does that mean? Um, the reference I've put down here is a book I, I've, I think it's really cool because it's, uh, it maps out the, uh, story of how the elephant brain was studied and how these discoveries were made. It's, it's quite interesting if you're interested in, in, uh. Comparative anatomy and um how that leads leads to surprising findings. Now, um So the solution. To the mystery is in these two graphs here. Um, so let's start with the one on the left. So you see on the y axis for many different species. The mass of the cortex. On Y and on X, the number of neurons in the cortex. So cerebral cortex, that's the cortex that I was talking about. Now, you can see here that there are kind of 22 lines here, uh, one including the elephant here and whales. And the other one, including primates, where we're sitting at the top here. So, what we can, what we can see from, from this is that given the mass of Of the of the cortex, um, primates have a disproportionately higher number of neurons and in fact, our cortex has the most num has, has the largest number of neurons of any cortex in the animal kingdom. So that's what our, what, what certainly makes our brain special and, and the whole branch of primates deviate from this relationship that other animals show, OK. So our cortex basically has evolved and the primate cortex has evolved distinctly from that of many other species, um, mammalian species. Now, how can that be? Well, the elephant still has more neurons. Where are they? Where they are, we can see on the right here. So this does the same. Um, so, so this, this, um, these dots here, the top line, that's reproducing what you see here on the left. And the bottom line shows the same relationship for neurons in the cerebellum. And it turns out that for its mass, the elephant has many more neurons in the cerebellum than predicted by what we see in most other species, and in fact it has the largest cerebellum of all species. So So most of those neurons that are. In fact, across all species, there are more neurons in the cerebellum than in the cortex, right? But the elephant is a big exception by having even more than You, you would, you would assume from other species. So. The elephant has a big cerebellum, given its size, and we have a big cerebral cortex or cortex, given the size, and that is. Um, part of the explanation of the differences now why is that the case? There's speculation about this. One is, I don't know if that makes really sense, but it's been said that maybe controlling a trunk requires a large motor brain area because it's, it's a fairly, it has many, many degrees of freedom. I don't know if that's true. Um, elephants do have other features such as fairly complex social hierarchies, for instance, so maybe the cerebellum plays a role in that. It's not really known, but that's the species difference that explains the more neurons. OK, uh, that's it. um, we're out of time. Thanks very much. See you on Thursday.
