SPEAKER 0
system.

SPEAKER 1
Right? Hi, everyone. Um, So, OK. So in a, in a, in a few minutes we're gonna talk about methods for measuring brain activity, but, but before that I wanted to briefly talk about this course feedback that you can give every semester, every year about the courses you've taken. It, um, this is really useful for us, so please do it. Um, so this is what we had last year. Last year we had a different team. Maley wasn't, wasn't, um, teaching the course, so there's been some changes this year already and. I, so, so here you can see what students thought last year. So the majority fortunately we're happy with the course they mostly agreed with that they were overall satisfied. Obviously we wanna, we wanna improve that. Hopefully we're doing well. Um, the. So the responses, overall I feel that that's, that's pretty positive. Um, it's nice to hear so you can, you can, you can give typed answers here to the question, what did you find most valuable? That is, that is great to hear if you especially can point out things that you thought went well, that's, that's actually good positive reinforcement for us so we know what we should keep and what we should keep doing. But then there's also um here the constructive criticism. What you didn't, what, what students didn't like and um what I pick up from those answers here. The one thing that is hard, I think, is to figure out how to study for the exam, and I can, I can understand that because we're teaching an awful lot of material from all sorts of different areas. There isn't really a textbook that you can go through that will guide you through this, and that's a little bit the nature of the discipline, right? So this, this has input from neuroscience, psychology, computer science, artificial intelligence, a little bit of philosophy, even, and so on. So all of this comes together. We were. We, we, we've been debating whether we should follow a textbook, but there isn't really a good up to-date textbook on this whole topic. We might try next year to, we, we're thinking about maybe using part of a textbook, uh, for the course because that makes it just easier to read in one go through the material and we can go in depth, but we're, we're really not sure about that. So what we're trying to do, I think as a guide. Here is that the information that's on the slides we hope that you know that for the exam and by knowing it's not just sort of regurgitating like a large language model but that you've got some understanding about it, right? Because if you have that, if you can generalise a little bit beyond these things and you've to some extent unders understood those topics and the high level concepts that we're trying to cover. So yeah, so, so we will, we will do an exam revision session and we'll come back to that again at the end of the year. But if you have any questions in the meantime, um, feel free to post on Piazza ask me. Posting on Piazza is great because if 11 of you has a question. Then I'm pretty sure you're not the only one. There will be others with a similar question in mind. So in the spirit of helping everybody, if you post things on Piazza, we'll try to give you good answers to those and help you guide you a little bit what we think is the is the content or the, the, the knowledge that you really need for the exam. The other thing to say is that the quizzes are pretty much. Um, identical to the first part of the exam, which is a multiple multiple choice, um, uh, set of questions, so it's about the, the, the sort of level of difficulty and so on. That's, that's what we're trying to do in the quizzes as well, OK? So you can use that as a guide and the second part of the exam, that's short answers, but every, basically it's the same type of questions except you're, you're not presented with a list of answers, but you have to sort of come up with it. Yourself and write it down in a short sentence. So that's, that's, I, I wanna, I wanna try and um keep Yeah, make you a little less worried about the, about the exam, um, and for sort of revision and keeping up to speed. Understand what we show on the slides basically that's that's really what we, what we want to, to, to get you to because those concepts they if you follow doing cognitive science or related things later on, those are the things that will help you um in these more advanced courses because you have a sort of foundation on which you can build OK? Hopefully that makes sense um I just wanted to. To mention that briefly at the beginning. Are there any comments or questions? Well, I I'm gonna switch over. Oops. What happened? Oops, no. OK, now. OK, so, um, that's kind of the final lecture on the more basic things that cover which, which are more foundational in this course, right? So we've talked about the brain, you had a couple of lectures about, uh, neural networks and what they do and what we're doing next is to go into different modalities. And actually talk about models more properly and so the hope is that what we've talked about so far give you a good foundation to then um um uh understand understand these these these more specific questions that we're gonna ask. So the last one of those introductory things is measuring brain activity and that's just giving you a high level overview of different techniques that um are available and that you find in the literature and in textbooks and so on. And I, I, I guess what I want you to understand is to, um, have a rough idea about what each method can tell you and what the limitations are, where, um, how much, how much you can read into, into what, what's coming out of these methods. So, yeah, we're covering different modalities um of, of brain recording. Um, so, as an overview, Um, I got this picture here which kind of is supposed to show that you can study the brain at different scales. So on the left here we have essentially a whole brain. We can do scans and we'll get to how that's done in, in a, in a, in a little bit. And there you study more the brain at the level of different areas, these Broadman areas that I spoke about which have these functional equivalents. So you're looking at basically which areas are maybe active during a task or something like that. So that's far removed from the actual computations that neurons are performing, right, because you only get an aggregate signal and then there are methods where you can zoom in more onto neurons so you can maybe look at what's called columns here. Those would be kind of subareas. So, so maybe you go to the visual cortex here and you start studying only a certain part of that that brain area and you look at the activity patterns on that. You're still not at the, at the level of neurons here, but you're getting more specific. So um. Example, um, the motor system as we've seen has this topological arrangement right where different parts of the body are represented in different places and so it's possible to study specifically, um, an area that's maybe responsible for controlling the hand so that would be that level of zoom and then you can of course further zoom in to the level down of of groups of neurons or even single neurons. And like with a microscope, when you do that, you quickly lose the bigger picture because you're really literally zooming in on a small place. And so I'm going to start with the zoomed in level and then we're going to the more broad scale methods that that are available. So, um, We can roughly subdivide the methods also in in uh by the signal that's actually acquired or that's that's that's measured. So there are electrical measurements, magnetic measurements, then there are optical measurements, not so much in humans, but animals that can be done. And then there's, there's a technique, fMRI, that's magnetic resonance imaging that um That kind of falls under the magnetic methods, but it's it's somewhat different to other methods, so. All these are in some way related to brain activity, to what a brain is doing at any moment in time, OK? So we'll, we'll go through all of these. This is just a list of um what I'm gonna talk about in the following. Before we get there, I, I wanna quickly talk a little bit about animals in research because I've already showed and mentioned recordings from single neurons and we're gonna see more of that uh in the next set of lectures on, on the visual system. So in many of these cases, animals are used and invasive recordings are done, which means basically there's a hole drilled in the skull or a little bit of skull bone is removed and something is inserted into the brain. which allows then recording neural activity. And obviously there are some, some ethical implications of that because um you're, you're essentially harming an animal. So this here is a summary of the numbers of animals. This is recent data from the Home Office. Number of animals used in research. Um, And the vast majority uh of uh of, of those are, are mice. Um, this is across the whole spectrum of fundamental and applied biomedical research. It includes um Uh, also testing, uh, regulatory testing in, in particular, so toxicology and so on. So that, that's, that's everything taken together here. Fish are quite, um, popular organisms also in neuroscience. I, I actually got a, got a, uh, um, an example of that later. Rats are used, birds, and then there are species, um, which, uh, have special protection that includes horses, dogs, monkeys, and cats. And those animals can only be used if there's no alternative available. So for example, for monkeys in neuroscience, um, monkey, the monkeys are the only model system for Parkinson's disease. There's just no mouse that can have Parkinson's disease. So if you want to study that, you actually have to use monkeys and, and, uh, there, there's no alternative to it. And you see those numbers are, are comparably small. Um, down here is listed, um, half of the animals are used in basic research, so that's the kind of research that's going on here at the university. Um, 25% are in translational research. That means translating some basic research finding into, say, a cure or treatment of a disease, which takes, is usually taken out of the lab first in animal models, is then. When it's declared safe in animal models, is then moved on to patients first for safety testing and then for efficacy testing. So that whole pipeline, uh, is, is, is about a quarter of the animals and then the 20, the, the, the other 20% here, 21% is regulatory testing. If somebody releases a new compound to do something, um, uh, that needs to be. That needs to be validated to be safe, uh uh for humans and that's that that includes all that in the UK uh cosmetic testing is not permitted that is permitted in in some other countries so if to see if your hair shampoo irritates your eye or something like that, that's not, um, not permitted here, um. And So research generally and, and at this university here is um is regulated by the UK government, by the Home Office. And there is a set of very strict regulations around this, and I think I would, I would argue that together with, um, with bioethics guidelines which, which the UK implements and which are implemented across, across Europe, they provide a really very strong framework. So in my opinion this is a framework where that makes abuse and, and, and, and questionable practise very difficult and if it's discovered it, it. It leads to severe consequences. So that compliance then means that there needs to be a demonstrated need for carrying out the, the, the animal experiments. The numbers used need to be carefully justified. And all these are the the use of animals are approved by committees who scrutinise applications and so if a neuroscientist here would put in an application to a funder, these justifications are part of the application and they're evaluated alongside with the application. And so if somebody comes in and suggests an unreasonable number of animals to be used in a study, that's not going to be funded. That's the end of it. So there's the, the, the, there's a pretty strict process which is at many levels starts at the university levels at the ethics committees, and in fact this same process also applies to uh humans in research. So if you, any of you maybe in a dissertation project if you want to do some research by giving people a questionnaire or or trying. Something with other people you actually have to go through that same ethics process. You don't need the licence that you need to do animal experiments for that, but, but the ethics process is basically the same. And then there's, there's, there's a second thing to mention is 3 R's. So this is a, this is a set of principles that is, um, that, that all this work has to comply with, um, which is the 3 R's are replacement reduction, refinement. So replacement is all about, um, replacing work on animals with other methods, um, and the UK is funding research into that. So can you use cell cultures, for instance, instead of an animal, uh, and so on. And you maybe use computational work, modelling and and AI and so on, um, reduction is, is about. Experimental design. And experiments that that actually add to knowledge and then there's the the refinement is all about um improving and maximising animal welfare while while while um conducting these experiments. So I, I hope it, it's a bit dry, but I just wanted to give you an idea of how this looks like in practise. I mean, I'm, I'm talking about the UK system here it's not, not the same everywhere in the world. Um, the EU has an overarching um. Uh, set of regulations which are quite similar. I think the UK is among the strictest in the world on this. It doesn't mean that there's less, less interesting animal research coming out of the UK, um, under this framework it's possible to produce world leading research, but not every country follows those principles, and I think that's a good thing because if you. If you, I mean, I would argue that without research on animals we wouldn't know as much, even, even remotely as much about the brain as we do now, and that has consequences for treatment of disorders and diseases and so on. So I would argue that this is absolutely necessary, but I mean this is something that people can have different opinions about and that's fair and, and I think, I think 11 just one needs to have a, a healthy discussion about that, um. Right, good. Uh, OK, I'll move on. Uh, maybe we have time to ask a few questions. OK, so let's, let's get into some animal research then. So the first topic here now is electrical recording. So here we are recording the electrical activity of the neurons. You know, neurons produce these action potentials or spikes, and we know that if we have something like um maybe a wire or. Uh, a cell that is electrically active, we can record the activity by placing an electrode close to that, um, that structure, right? You can, you can see changes in the electrical field. You can pick those up with respect to some reference. You can amplify it, the noise it, and then, uh, you get, you, you can see what is electrically happening inside, uh, or in these neurons. So here. We have a setup where an electrode is inserted into a brain. It's actually not inserted into a neuron. It's just near, it's, it's placed near nearby some neurons. And then the signal, the raw signal that comes out of this after some amplification is looking like this here. So pretty noisy, um, fluctuations in, in the voltage that we record and occasionally we see these spiky events here and these are the action potentials. They show up as big. Big changes in the electrical field because big currents are flowing, uh, during action potentials. So then it's, we can, we can go, we take that signal first of all we do something we call bandpass filtering so we're filtering out the very slow and the very fast fluctuations and that makes those spikes more visible here. So you see here, uh, a one millisecond magnification of such an event. And then we can for instance do a threshold detection of those spikes and we have um a list of all the times at which a neuron has been spiking. So that's very precise in terms of both the um. The time domain, so these recordings are typically done with 30 kilohertz, that's 30,000 samples per second coming through. So that's, so we can pick up every single spike and we know exactly when it happened. So, um, temporarily, very precise sub millisecond resolution, but in this setup here, only maybe one or maybe a few neurons, if you're lucky at the time with a single electrode. So that's the big limitation here. Given that we have tens or hundreds of thousands of neurons within a certain brain area, just seeing one of them isn't, isn't very useful. We also know neurons are talking to each other, so by seeing one neuron, we don't know much about what the system is doing because we have no idea what, what, what's coming in from other neurons and so on, right? So, um, you can scale this up a little bit, um, and build these arrays of micro electrodes. So this is a, um, a system known as a Utah array. Um, those are little microwires, um, each of them has a contact at the end, and those arrays can be implanted, so one would remove a little bit of the skull bone. Push the array into the brain and then close it all neatly again, the cable coming out that then relays the signal, and such arrays are actually implanted in people, so people with ALS, for instance, or with lesions to their spinal cord who have lost ability to move. These people are volunteering currently to get such areas implanted, and usually they get implants in the motor system. So that like in this example here they can then learn to um control some kind of prosthetic device. So here it's actually a robot arm um to restore some kind of autonomy again to to restore some degree of movement. Another common example is is moving a cursor on a screen. a um um uh one of my former PhD students is now in in Boston in the BrainGate Consortium and he developed a system. Where people can learn to really quickly do QWERTY typing on a keyboard by just thinking so that that's that's that expands communication abilities so that's an application, but these arrays are used in research um quite um a lot in, in particular in, in primates and. Here's a different electrical recording system. These are so-called high density probes. So now instead of having one. Wire going in with one contact at the end. These are like little very thin needles which are filled with these contacts here, so they can have about 1000 contacts on them. This system here called the neuropixels probe allows to record 384 channels simultaneously, so you select basically which channels you record from from about 1000, but there are systems now coming out. Which you can almost buy from off the shelf now which have 1,024 channels on them. So those systems, obviously that's great because you can, you can, you can start seeing many more neurons at the same time with a single needle like this put into the brain. So with, with, with a single neuropixels probe, it's possible to see 100 or more neurons at the same time. Here's another system we've done some work with that. It's, it's an in vitro system, so that's not for implantation or anything that's that you put neurons on this that has 4,096 channels. And I've, I've put the data rates on here, so the neuropixels probe 22 megabytes per second, this biochem array 142 megabytes per second. So this is a lot of large data to analyse and that's good because there's people doing the experiments need us computational folks to help them with, with, um, uh, crunching the data. So here's an example of uh from, from such a neuropixel system. So here we see the raw traces, um, you see some spikes. You also see some oscillations here. These are not, not spikes, but these are oscillations that the brain produces which can be picked up simultaneously. Um, you can then basically go and cluster different neurons that you see. So, so, so some of these spikes here, um. Or or each of these spikes here can come from a different neuron because you're seeing many neurons at the same time. So on the left here you see the kind of footprint that each neuron leaves after doing some clustering on this multi-electrode array, and that that's how, how, how, how single neuron activity is then is then. Uh, extracted from such recordings. It's, it's a sort of interesting computational problem because large data, uh, makes that very hard to scale. Here's, um, just a plot of, um, a recording from two probes which were inserted into a mouse brain simultaneously. So left is probe one, right is probe one. Each little dot here is a single spike. And Um, vertically here we see different brain structures. So on the top we have the cortex, that's the hippocampus, here's the thalamus, and so you can, it's possible to see the activity simultaneously from multiple brain areas. So that's, that's nice to learn to, to see how they talk to each other and you can do this in, in this case in both hemispheres at the same time in, in approximately the same location. So people are are doing this quite extensively now to map out not just one brain area, but to understand how in a task maybe different parts of the brain are talking to each other. Good. So that's um that's the, the, um, that's the sort of most precise method, as I said, high temporal precision here we can see single spikes, we can see single neurons, but compared to the number of neurons in a, in, in a mammalian brain, even a mouse brain, that's still a small subset of of those neurons, um. Now if we wanted to see more, more of what the brain is doing at the same time, we need to move away from collecting single neurons because that doesn't really scale anymore. We need to focus more on something like an aggregate signal, and that falls under the category of field recordings. So in this case, we're using electrodes again, but these electrodes now are constructed such that they see the electrical field changes in a larger volume around them, right? So in a volume that includes hundreds of thousands of neurons at the same time. Um, and one method of doing that is called ECOG or electroccortography. That's a tongue twister. Um, where And a flat area, it's a flexible array of electrodes. are put on the exposed cortex surface. Um, so you can, you can, so, so in this picture here, the, the black dots are single electrodes, so you can, you can cover a large area of the cortex. And this is a, a, a common technique in, um, in, uh, in, in surgery where, um, People often with epilepsy need brain surgery or with brain tumours need brain surgery, and this is a way in the clinic to evaluate normal brain function to be sure to remove the right parts of the brain and not damage any of the wrong parts. It's often used to locate seizures, for example, where they're coming from, to be to be to do more precise surgery planning. But here we have, uh, this is just an example of the kind of things you can see there. This is actually a, an experiment where ECOG was recorded simultaneously with, um, functional magnetic resonance imaging, which we'll, we'll get to later. And here, um, uh, the patient was doing a movement, performing a movement, and so what we see here is actually activations in the motor cortex at the expected locations. Um. This is an imagined movement and so this imagined movement then has activations less in those areas which are controlling the movement, the primary motor cortex, but more in adjacent areas which are active here as well. So that's just an example of what you can see. So you're you're operating at the level of brain areas, but the signal is still pretty precise because it's, it's um it's sampled at high, high sampling rates. So spatially less good obviously than these implanted arrays, but in terms of time resolution still very high sampling rates are about 30 kilohertz maybe or 20 kilohertz or something like that. So obviously that's an invasive method, so you, you wouldn't necessarily wanna use that too often um because that's quite risky to do so then. We have a method that you're probably all familiar with, um. EEG is uh the same as ECOG except that the electrodes are placed outside the skull skull, um. It's possible to use any number of electrodes as much as you can fit on a skull, basically, uh, traditionally, what, so in the clinic, if you ever had an EEG, you would get this thing put on your head and then they would put gel into into each of the contacts that's to increase the conductance to get a better signal. And then what you're seeing is this, this um signal here which basically looks like an oscillatory signal of different. Uh, frequency content and so on coming out of each of these channels, right? And um. What is often done, what what's this often used for is to look for brain oscillations. So for instance, it's a way to study whether a person has normal or abnormal sleep patterns that is revealed very nicely by EEG recordings. But um it is also possible to study how different parts of the brain respond, say, under, under, during, during certain tasks or under certain perceptual conditions. So one example that is often done is when an ophthalmologist finds there's something wrong with vision. But the eye seems OK, then you would go and and look in the, in the visual system of the brain and so you can place an EEG electrode at the back of the brain occipital cortex, which is the receiving part of the visual system, and then shine some flashes onto the retina and see what signal is recorded there or. One could even do something like design a task here, which is, has to be quite carefully structured. I'll explain in a minute why, which is some kind of problem solving task. Um. And then it's possible to record an EEG. Because we're seeing in an EEG these electrodes are far away from the brain, the signal is quite weak. It's very noisy, so the signal to noise of these signals is poor, but it, it still has this high temporal fidelity. It's possible to record the signal over many of trials of, for example, a problem solving task over many flashes that are given to a patient and then creates a kind of average signal. Which is something which then might see some look like something like this here so averaging together over many trials gives an indication of the average activity that the brain is producing um uh at different time points during the trial of course that um during a task, of course that requires some careful time alignment. So in a problem solving task every single trial needs to be very similar to all the other trials, otherwise the averaging wouldn't work. And those kind of potentials that you get out of these, these average potentials, they're called event related potentials, so they might be, yeah, they might reveal some dynamics happening across the brain during the problem solving phase of a task or during the answer phase of a task and so on. So yeah, so this is, this has been done extensively and I think, I think what it can tell us at least is about sequential activation of different parts of the brain because as I said, this is very, very precise in time we can uh we can, we can, we can, we can even spot. Spots um uh the relatively fast progression of activity between brain areas we can, we can, we can see that as delays and so it's possible to see how activity spreads across the brain as a particular task is done. Um So that's, that's EEG and uh event related potentials. Here's, here's a cool one that I think is, is sort of just coming out and who knows, maybe there will be something to buy soon. So this is electromyography. This is um. This is activity from motor neurons which you can record anywhere in the body where you have motor neurons terminating on muscles, and typically that's done on the arm. The initial idea was that if somebody had lost a hand. But the motor neurons are still active, then you can just try to read out the activity from the motor neurons to then control a prosthetic hand and that does work so people are walking around with that. You can, you can do the same thing also say with a leg and so on, um, but it's, it's, it's cool because you, you cannot just do that you, you can think of um. You, you can think of, uh, the motor neuron activity as a general output stream from the brain. So, um, there are people who are, uh, have developed, um, quite high fidelity, uh, devices which are the, the company was bought by Meta Now at some point I think Facebook will start selling these things. You put on an armband and it turns out that you can then, um. You can learn all sorts of things like the idea is of course that you have your mobile phone and you have this armband and then you control just by moving your hand you control what's happening on your screen and the, the example video they had is that somebody went like this and then you, you, you thumb up the post on Facebook. Nobody of yous on Facebook, right? I hope I, uh, pardon isn't it? I think it's possible to buy it now, um, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. I mean they they have a research version of it where they've demonstrated that it's even possible to just it's even sufficient to think that you don't need to actually do the action. It's sufficient to do that and the, the signals that by, by just thinking about the action there's enough signal coming down here so that you can pick this up and give the thumb thumbs up to the Facebook post, that kind of thing, um, their promotion video back in the day so I had a one of my former PhD students did an internship in that group, um, and they initially were thinking they had a person riding on a bicycle and remote controlling, you know, what song you're listening to on your phone, that kind of stuff. But there it's very difficult because um when you put on an armband, it will be slightly different every time and then everybody's arm is a bit different so they haven't quite cracked that but um they at least at least movement decoding works really well yeah so this is a version here that is actually um that that you you can build that for yourself for I think very little money um so there are um open source versions of these devices out there for for uh for playing yourself um. Anyway, OK, so magnetic recordings. The one this works a bit well you you can sort of think about it a little bit like EEG so there's MEG, but MEG allows um so I'm not gonna go into the technology in outbox. You need superconducting magnets for that so that's one big limitation because it's a big machine as you can see here. But you can basically instead of recording the electrical signal, you're recording the magnetic signal of neurons, and in this way you can go deep inside the brain. You can actually record not just from the surface where the electrical signals are, but by controlling magnetic fields in the right way, you can also look inside the brain and so you can get a three dimensional view of magnetic activity which corresponds to neural activity across the brain. Um, and so this allows quite careful characterization of activations of groups of neurons. So for instance here we have, uh, one case where we see visual feature analysis. So the person was looking at some visual features and that happens as expected in the occipital cortex because that's where vision takes place, as we'll see from tomorrow. Um, now this is letter string analysis and you see how the activity pattern shifts away a little bit from these primary visual areas to more high level visual areas and then lexical semantic analysis of sentences moves over to a completely different area. So this would be um Wernike's area which is involved in interpreting language. So those kind of localizations are possible with MEG because again it's not just, it, it, it, one advantage is you can, you can, you can sort of look into the brain a little bit and the second one is that still um a lot of these activations as you see here in those tasks, so these are averages again so over multiple trials are actually quite short so you need. So this is, uh, between this whole event is over in 400 milliseconds, right? So you need, you need um high frequency sampling to be able to, to see those signals reliably and also to distinguish these kind of signals from each other. So, um, so MEG is, is, is more expensive, is more, more of an effort. I I'm not aware of really big clinical uses of that, um, but it's certainly a research tool. And then finally, um, we have FMRI functional magnetic resonance imaging so you, you might know this, uh, this, this is a medical tool, not necessarily the functional version, but MRI scans are used everywhere to get a, a structural scan of a structure, um, so to, to look for damages, for instance, a structural MRI would tell you of a brain would tell you if there's any kind of lesion maybe through a stroke or something like that. Now functional magnetic resonance imaging adds a little twist which makes it possible to spot some in a very indirect way, neural activity. So what functional magnetic resonance imaging measures is the oxygenation level of the blood. It looks, it basically the signal is proportional to some extent to the to the amount of oxygen in the blood. And then the idea is that. Brain areas which are more active consume more oxygen and so that level will go down and that's the way how fMRI tells you about which parts of the brain have been more sort of active where active just means basically they've been metabolically more active, more sort of has been going on in that. Now this is um you if you went to the tutorial where we did the taxi driver um paper they used um they used uh MRI and um they uh like here had to. Partition. So what comes out of the scanner is the signal in so-called voxels. These are three dimensional pixels, and they're about maybe 1x1 x 1 millimetre cubed, so relatively large, contain. You know, 100,000 neurons or something like that, more than the number of neurons in a fly brain, but that's a single box, so that's a proxy for the activity of an awful lot of neurons at the same time. So spatial resolution is really poor here. Um, also, a, a big problem is metabolic changes are slow, right? So when cells are active and they're burning ATP and so on, all that takes time. So that signal that we're measuring is also lagging and is very slow in comparison to any kind of neural activity, and it is actually a very noisy and weak signal. Um, if you see those kind of scans here where nicely highlighted brain areas show you that this or that part of the brain has been active during a task, that is after a whole complicated pipeline of processing that needs to be done to reveal these differences. So it's, it's kind of, um, it's the, the great thing about this technique is that at least in research settings these scanners are not terribly expensive because they're so widely used. Um, they're not, not that expensive to run, so they're quite attractive as a method because they allow you to look into the brain, um. And um uh. It's, it's, it's it on the whole it's, it's, it's a very flexible technique, but I think in terms of interpretation one has to be a bit careful about whether one the signal that comes out of that is really a proper signal because of all these caveats like we're, we're measuring. Oxygen levels and not activity, but that's a very common technique across cognitive science and basically the conclusions are usually OK which brain area was particularly active in a task and usually that's done in contrast to another one, so a sort of comparison to work out where in the brain certain things happen that's what this can tell us. OK, final method, I think, are optical recordings and I'll go over it super quick. Um, but it's, it's actually pretty cool, but, um, Has advantages and disadvantages. So what you can do is you can take a cell and you can insert via a process called transfiction a foreign gene into that cell and if you do that in the right way, then the cell will start expressing that gene. So there are some genes which are encoding fluorescent proteins. And uh these these these pro these genes are basically engineered these days um and those proteins can engineered in a way that they um become fluorescent for instance when they bind calcium ions to them. Now we know that when a neuron is active, the calcium levels inside the neuron will increase. That's because of how the spiking works and so on, so never mind the details, but that's the case. We get an increase in calcium level. So if we get increased calcium into a neuron that has these fluorescent proteins expressed in its membrane, Then those proteins will become fluorescent once the neuron has been active, and then you can use a light source, evoke fluorescence, and see, see those neurons glow basically and that's what you're seeing here. So people have made whole animals with these fluorescent proteins. They glow in the dark kind of min. Silly things like that, but there's, there's actually a useful, they're actually a useful tool, not just in neuroscience, but to monitor cell activity in general. And so it's possible, so down here in in part D we see some raw traces of this signal that we're getting. Each line is a single neuron, so we can see many, many single neurons. In, in, in, in fact, people have done recordings where they record this signal across the whole cortex, um, hundreds of thousands of neurons at the same time. That is possible. Um, the signal is a bit slow, so the temporal resolution isn't as good as with the electrical recordings. It, it lags a little bit behind and it decays a little bit slower, so you cannot see single spikes, but you, you can still see, see single neurons and you can see them at scale, and you can even do a kind of 3D scanning version of that where you can go across a volume. So that's um that that is a technique that is especially well established in mice because mouse genetics are really well understood and the expression of those genes can be targeted to special neuron types for instance and so on so there's a whole kind of industry behind that to refine and improve those methods and we've we've learned an awful lot from from fluorescence imaging. Um, OK, um, got a couple of videos to finish off on, uh. I will Go over so I have a few. There we go. So here are some examples of just how the raw signal looks like from different electronic electrical recording devices. So that one here, this is a, this neurop pixels array that I, the super dense array, and yeah, you see the, the, the time that's passing here. In total we see about 9 seconds of of of activity, um, so that's the raw signal that's coming out of those, um. Kind of devices with basically different numbers of channels that can record. Um, Here, Is A video of um a slice of hippocampus put on a multi-electrode array which then delivers an electrical stimulation at some point. So this kind of preparations are used in epilepsy research quite intensively because as you can see here, the colour indicates positive and negative potential basically you can see a whole spreading of activation across the structure. So I think it's, it's just a nice, nice, uh, it's, it's. And this is a very precise signal so you, you can, you can pick out what every, every single neuron is doing. Here is um this optical imaging that the fluorescence imaging that I mentioned just um at the end. So this is um this fluorescent protein expressed in every neuron in the in the zebrafish brain. In the larval zebrafish brain, larval zebrafish are transparent. That's a big advantage so you can, you can see inside them basically, and this is the activity. Recorded in a living zebrafish, it's kind of fixed in a jelly so it can't move, so this becomes a bit more stable. Um, So I think yeah so so we see from different orientations so you can we can see we can we can literally now study every single neuron in an organism in a living organism and people are are are extending those approaches so that they can do behaviours do movements and so on. So yeah, so that's great for basic research. Here is um Demo of an ECOG signal. And we have a beep and then this shows you how the activity changes after the presentation of a tone. So what you can see in this video, you, you can see a little beep appearing here and then with a little latency you can see how the brain, the activity starts spreading across the brain. All the way to a button press, so that's that's that kind of illustrates because that's high temporal fidelity we can actually follow that signal signal in real time as it evolves that we're always a bit behind reality basically brain sees things later than they actually happen. Here's an EEG and again this is something if you wanted to you can build yourself. Backyard Brains is a cool um group of people. They, they, they have all sorts of open source um cheap to build devices that they developed where uh 1111 that's that's that's that I've seen is called the spiker box and you can catch an insect somewhere outside. And you can, you can use the spiker box to record potentials in, for example, an insect leg, so there are videos of that as well. They've developed this simple, OK. So, so this is a simple EEG sensor, that's a homemade one that costs maybe, I don't know exactly how, this is, this, this is a few tens of 10s of pounds maybe that you need in hardware to do that. Um, and all the, the circuitry boards and things, yeah, so this is OK, forget it. You need to watch that yourself, um, go to Backyard Brains if you're interested and, and take a look, um, so you can see how the, the, um, certain wave patterns change when, uh, you close or open your eye or when you, you, you make it dark. Um, they also, I think, have a video on, uh, how you can measure your EEG during sleep and so on. Uh, what's next? Let me see. OK, that's it, and we're out of time. Great. Any questions quickly or any? Right, see you tomorrow then and talk about vision.

SPEAKER 0
I don't know. No. I Um, I just wonder what type of research that you do.
