SPEAKER 0
I think Right.

SPEAKER 1
Hello, good afternoon. Um, so that's gonna be the, the, the final lecture on this part on learning and memory. And in this lecture, we're going to dive a little bit into the mechanisms that we know about are behind learning and memory in the brain. Um, Before, so, so what we're gonna cover is, first of all, I'll talk a bit about different forms of learning. So just to give you a flavour that there isn't a single form, but we can we can sort of categorise them into different forms and what you can probably see already is that these different forms require different rules. So if we wanted to make models of them, we would actually need different types of models with different ingredients for that. And then we're going to go on and talk about a very simple model which is experimentally well motivated and was was actually. Proposed before there was any data on that, which is heavy and plasticity and which we believe is the basis for learning and memory in the brain in general. And then we go over a few implications of that, uh, and I'll I'll show some data that relates to heavy and plasticity in particular. So this isn't an exhaustive exhaustive coverage of this mechanistic models that we have of learning and memory. It, it, it, it's more supposed to give you a flavour and an idea of what the thinking is, uh, behind, behind that. So, let's see. So we'll start with learning. Well, learning, um, I tried to come up with a good definition here. So here's one is learning is an adaptive change in the nervous system. That supports acquisition, storage, and updating of knowledge, skills and behaviours, right? So that's super broad. You can think of of a very simple creature like a little worm that um might learn, be able to learn to avoid certain environmental stimuli and so on that falls under that category. And of course our knowledge acquisition um and so on equally. So there's a broad spectrum of what what includes learning. And I've listed here, so I've tried to come up with a couple of, of distinct forms of learning. The list can go go on longer. So if, if you look at textbooks and so on, there's kind of various sorts of categorizations of types of learning that exist and all qualitatively in some way different. So the list that I would sort of like to introduce because we can, we can easily tie them not only to function, but also to some sort of algorithmic view is the one here. Um, so one simple form of learning we can summarise as non-associative learning. So we've seen associative learning last time already. Non-associative learning is basically any form of learning. That is due to repeated exposure, and the best example of that is that you start ignoring certain things in your environment if you're exposed to them continuously, so that would include habituation. There's an opposite form which is sensitization where you become more sensitive to certain stimuli that's that's particularly prominent in pain. So pain sensitivity after a certain insult can actually increase. So those are relatively simple changes and if you think about the types of model you would use, right, so habituation, you would basically. Um, integrate over time some experience and then reduce the strength of the neural response to that, right? So that's a kind of simple way of, of, of modelling such learning. Now the more interesting one, is associative learning because that's all about relationships between stimuli. Now the model we did yesterday, the Hopfield model, that's auto associative. So Um, in this case, memories strengthen themselves, right? So they are, they're self- amplifying, but equally it could be a relationship, an association between, say, a stimulus and an action or a stimulus and some outcome of some later outcome. So any kind of kind of association. So conditioning is a classic example for that. And in fact, um, I will, so after next week, we will have a little segment on reinforcement learning, um, that comes further down and there we will discuss that in more detail as well. So this is associative learning, broadly speaking, discovering associations that might be helpful or useful to an organism. Um, another form that is very important in the brain is statistical learning, and that's basically learning from data. So, um, This is about detecting regularities in data. This could be all our sensory information that's coming in. So this sensory information is not random. It's highly structured, and our brains are really good at picking up such, such structure and representing it in a useful way, and that is done as far as we know without any kind of objective or supervision. That's just the brain. Receiving inputs and trying to find a sensible representation of these inputs on top of which then cognitive operations can be performed. So statistical learning has a long history in in in in machine learning. This was always the the dream was you build a machine that basically you can give some data and the machine can tell you what's in this data and what's important about it. And there are recent. Approaches of self-supervised learning, contrastive learning, and so on, which are extremely powerful. Um, OK, so here's next on this list I've put in concept formation because that's actually a form of, I mean, you can, you can put these in other this one includes probably some of the other categories as well, but concept formation, oh no, how, why does it do that? concept formation is something that um. That can be related to generalisation, right? So you're going away from the immediate stimulus and the information that you're getting and you're you're trying to to acquire some higher level concept that describes a whole large collection of data that you might encounter in your life, so. So that that form of learning seems different from a simple associative learning and actually what, so I will not, we will not have time to really get into that but um there's a theory if you're interested you can look that up called complementary learning systems hypothesis that essentially says that we have um. We have parts of our brain dedicated more to the associative part of the learning, and that's closer to the information that we receive through our senses. And then on top of that we have a system which is more looking at concepts and trying to put the information that's coming in into a higher level structure that recognises, learns and updates these concepts. So. The idea is that first, Information enters the more associative areas and then if they're deemed relevant and if they make sense and if there's some kind of structure to them, then they get stored in in in in these more conceptual representations and the concepts sit in the cortex. The associative part is more the hippocampus, and there's a whole story about how sleep is important for that so getting things from the hippocampus in the cortex happens in part during sleep. OK, next one on the list is qualitative very different. Um, it's, uh, reinforcement learning, and reinforcement learning is learning from rewards and punishments, and we'll go into that after the next week. So in week 10 we'll, we'll talk about this. Reinforcement learning has been extremely. Um, popular in machine learning and, and AI in, in recent years. Large language models are trained with that principle. And not only that, so, so AlphaGo is an example. The, the, the machine that plays Go at superhuman performance was trained using reinforcement learning and so on. So I think that's, that's an important one to, to, to know about. And then I, and I think maybe is gonna talk about this next week when it comes to observation and social learning. So this is imitation, um, modelling, and so on, so things that we can learn from other people or the animals that they can learn from, from other animals. This kind of, this type of learning is also different because it might be possible to tie this to reinforcement learning. But reinforcement learning, as we'll see, is a very slow form of learning, and social learning can be really very quick. So these two things don't entirely go well together. All right, so I put that up to give you essentially, as I said, the idea that there are these at a, at a high level, very different forms of learning. And when you just kind of consider what sort of you would do at the algorithmic level to solve these different learning problems, you would probably come up with fairly different answers depending on which, which form you're looking at. Um, what we're trying to do in computational neuroscience is to unify all that together, and that's an ongoing research programme. So, um, it's, uh, this is an unsolved problem. So now two other forms of general forms of learning that we encounter. The first one is this broad class of supervised learning. And that basically assume assumes that we have a teaching signal that we can use to update representations, right? So memory representations are modified according to an error or some objective function and um this could be labels in data, this could be the outcome of a task or whatever it is, right? And an example you've seen the perceptron learning rule is essentially that it's a form of supervised learning. You know what the outcome should be and you train the, the, the, the machine to produce an outcome for, for a large set of data and for a long time, machine learning AI models were trained like this because back propagation is, is the algorithm that allows to train really large networks to perform very well on supervised tasks, right? So the, the, the, the image classification task is one of them. Um, and that works really well. Now, um. It, it is a very powerful learning we know because Backprop really has pushed that forward, um, but there are a few problems with it. The first one is it, you, you, when you want to solve a particular task, you need to be very careful about the objective because these networks might not do what you expect them to do. They kind of cheat sometimes and find shortcuts that you, that prevent generalisation. Um, another one I've not written down here is that this is, this form of learning is very data intensive. You need millions, ideally data sets with millions of labels, right? So then it works, but if you get into a sparser data regime, this doesn't work so well anymore. The opposite to that is this unsupervised learning. This is, as I called it earlier, statistical learning. And it's all about building representations that are useful for performing operations in. It's a structure from data idea. Um, some examples, depending on what degree you're in and what your background is, you might have come across, I don't know. Has anyone come across principal components analysis? That's a form of, yeah, good. So that's a form of unsupervised learning. Um, there's, uh, clustering approaches, clustering methods are, are unsupervised, uh, density estimation methods, and so on. So there's a whole broad class, and this is, this is useful because, um, there's a strong mathematical, uh, um, machinery behind this. That allows you to even get good unsupervised learning from quite limited data sets, so you can choose Bayesian approaches where you can put strong priors onto your model and that allows you to build very effective models even from from fairly limited data. So it's in machine learning it's it's a very essential method and. In the brain we think this is the principle that builds these early sensory representations. So if you think back to the simple cells in the visual cortex or the complex cells, those are those types of receptive fields, those types of representations can actually theoretically can be theoretically motivated. Um, quite well as very efficient ways of encoding visual data and similar ideas exist in auditory domains and so on, so they can be, they can be learned, uh, in a, in a, in an unsupervised way. So yeah, there's still a debate about how much in the brain is unsupervised and how much isn't, right? That's I think unsupervised learning, we would sort of look at from the point of view of nature in the nature versus nurture debate, whereas the nurture part comes in through social learning, supervision, all these kind of things, right? And there is a balance between those two things in how brains are built up. This is an ongoing debate. Good. So. Um, so let's, let's move on to a, to a key mechanism that's we believe is behind all learning in the brain. And this is, as this is a very simple principle that, um, and, uh, it sort of as always in biology, if you look more closely, it gets a bit complicated. I'm going to give you a little flavour of it, but the basic idea is super simple. And this is due to. A psychologist, um, Donald Hebb, I think he was a child, child psychologist. He was, so he was observing children learning things and, and growing up and so on, but he also had an interest in, in neuroscience and at that point in time, so in the 1940s, some things were known about neuroanatomy. People knew they were neurons, they were electrically active, they were communicating somehow, um, they formed networks that were recurrently connected and somehow he, so these ideas that he developed were based on, on, on, on those insights back then. There was very little known about actually the activity and so on, um, completely different time to what what we have now. But so he thought about these reverberating loops that connected circuits of neurons might form, and we'll see that a bit later. I've got some examples later of that. And then he postulated that maybe the connections between the neurons are actually changing and the changes of those connections. Are responsible for these adaptive changes that learning constitutes and so this is an original sentence from the book that he wrote um which is always cited. I'm not going to read it because it's confusing. The the sentence below is the short form of it that everyone uses and that's that just says cells or neurons that fire together wire together, right? So if two neurons are coactive, then the connection between them will will get stronger. And that's exactly what we've seen yesterday in the Hopfield network. That's how we train our Hop field network. If two neurons are together in the same patterns are simultaneously active, we need to make the connection stronger to have them to, to, to, to let the network to remember this pattern, and that's exactly that principle here. So that was 1949 when the book was published. I mean, the most of that book I haven't actually read it, I admit, and I think, yeah, you got a question. OK.

SPEAKER 2
So you don't like the connection and getting stronger and the neurons that like how does that actually happen? OK, yeah, good question.

SPEAKER 1
I'm not gonna explain it in on the slides, so I can, I can say a few words about that. So the, there are a number of mechanisms, um, that by which synapses change their strength, um, as always in biology, there's, there's a lot that's possible. The main mechanism, uh, responsible. Is the number of neurotransmitter receptors on the post-synaptic side, so on the receiving side in the dendrite. At each synapse, you have a certain number of these receptors on average um present that sends neurotransmitter, and the more you have, the stronger the change of the potential in the post-synaptic neuron will be. And what happens during strengthening is that more of these receptors get inserted into the membrane. And that makes the, that makes the, the synapse stronger. If you remember this bit about synaptic transmission that I had, there were also vesicles there in the pre-synaptic cell that contain neurotransmitter. And there's, there's multiple ways. So it might be that the probability of release from of neurotransmitter increases, that happens early in development, or that the number of vesicles available increases. That's another mechanism that again is more like an early developmental phenomenon. And the receptor expression post-synaptically, that's the main mechanism for, for, that's happening in, in us right now. Yeah, thanks for the question. Um, so I, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm always a bit unsure about how much detail to add here because I could go on forever about any of these things, right? But, um, need to, to distil a bit what's useful for you and versus what excites me. OK, so, um, neurons that fire together wire together, well, um, in 1973, the actual mechanism was discovered. So long after, this is a classic experiment here by Bliss Lomo, who did the following. They took a brain slice which contained the hippocampus, so a thin slice of brain tissue with intact neurons in them. And the hippocampus is structured in a way that it's quite easy to stimulate a white matter a bundle of of axonal fibres. They're very easy to find and then record from the receiving neurons. And so what they did was to stimulate the axons with a high frequency pulse. So this is um at 100 hertz. So, um. That's 100 stimuli pulses stimulated in 1 2nd. And they measured the response of the that that the receiving neurons produced. So each dot here is the response of those neurons of the receiving neurons to a weak stimulus, just a single stimulus to check their strength, and you can see that from an initial level, which is around 0.2 here after this high frequency stimulation, suddenly the response increased massively. To about 0.3, and that actually lasted for in this experiment 20 minutes. And then what they did is they replaced this high frequency stimulus here, this brief one. They, they, they used another stimulus, and this is a low frequency stimulation, so this is 2 stimuli per second continuously for 10 minutes. And that reversed this effect and decreased the strength of the of the postsynaptic response again. So from that, We can conclude there is a way of strengthening synapses by providing high frequency input, lots of activity. And then a synapse can be weakened again when the activity, when there is some activity, but it's at a low frequency, it's it's, it's a weak activity. And the increase in activity is called a long term potentiation, long term because this was back then observed to last for minutes, tens of minutes. We now know this can last for hours, days, even longer. And the suppression of the connection strength is called long-term depression, and equally, that's a permanent form of, of, uh, of, of um uh uh change in, in synaptic strength. So the first part, the high frequency stimulation leading to potentiation, that is completely in line with Donald Hab's idea because what a high frequency stimulus causes is high activity in the axon that comes in. And because of the many spikes that are coming in through to the target neurons, these neurons will also be active. So you create a situation here where the pre-synaptic and the post-synaptic neuron are both highly active. So that that's Donald Hebb's idea basically demonstrated here in an experiment. The depression wasn't really postulated by Donald Hebb, but it kind of makes sense that if you. Have a mechanism to make the synapses stronger, you probably want to have one to make them weaker again, otherwise, every synapse will be strong at some point and uh there won't be any difference. So yeah, so what we, what we think from this, what we believe is that this, this is the, the fundamental mechanism that, that underlies learning and memory. So there's there's a little twist, and if you go on and look in more detail, you find many interesting things happening as well. So this is an example of this is a discovery which was made by Richard Morris here in Edinburgh, so I thought I'd mention it. It turns out if a high frequency stimulus is given only once and it's not too strong. Then you get a potentiation, but that potentiation essentially decays back down again to the previous level after 10s to hundreds of minutes in that order of magnitude, so it's not a permanent change. But then by through giving multiple of these high frequency stimuli. In in succession, one can convert such a temporary change into a much more permanent change, and that has been termed early and late LTP. Yep. Isn't the initial spike is the same is the suggestion

SPEAKER 3
that like um the week, like for the like late LTP we're using the same stimulus for like multiple times in succession. Is that the Yeah, so the idea behind it is

SPEAKER 1
the interpretation is that if you give one of those stimuli, one of those high frequency stimuli. You tell the synapse something has happened. But I want to have more happen before I commit to become strong forever, basically. So this is it's, it's the it's it's called synaptic tagging and capture or capture and tagging hypothesis that was put forward by Richard Morris on this and interestingly he actually found a behavioural correlate of that. So a short exposure in behaviours isn't sufficient necessarily to cause a long lasting memory. But when conditions are created, which are more like this year, where there's a repeated activation, then things really become longer, longer lasting memories. So there's a whole body of work around that. It might have to do, I mean, It might have to do with the selection of memories that we want to really remember and put into our system, right? So you might remember something for a short time, see if it's important, and if not, it's gonna decay again. That's the idea behind it. I mean this is, this is not super important because there are a lot going on here. I just wanted to basically show you it's not quite as simple as, as, as the initial experiments suggest. Right, um, OK, so let's, let's make a model of this. Um, we're here to, to make models, so we can do that. So we want to mathematically formulate the idea that neurons, neurons that fire together wired together. So first we need to make a neuron. This is a neuron which is very similar to the McCullor-Pitts neuron that you've seen before. Except that I've changed here the transfer function. So this part is the same as McCulloch and Pitt. We have one neuron. It gets many inputs from other neurons. These other neurons are called X indexed by J, and each of these inputs has a weight associated as a synaptic strength associated with it, and we just collect all those and sum them together. And then we pass them through some function. I don't want to use the step function here because actually we want to distinguish between different levels of activity. So what I'm using here is a rectifying function. It could be if you know neural networks, it could be a real function or something like that, right? So a function that outputs a graded value that is proportional to the level of activity. And um so that's our neuron model, and now we want to see how we have to change the weights in order to get heavy and plasticity. Any, anyone wants to make a guess how, how to do that, it's actually really simple. Um, Anyone has a guess. What will we do? OK, I'll bring it up. So here, so what we're doing is we're changing the weights proportional to the product of the activity of the target neuron and the input neuron for each connection, right? So the product, that's just the correlation. It'll be high when both neurons are active. It'll be lower when only one neuron is highly active, the other one low, and it'll be zero if both neurons are inactive. So that's it. Um, just the product between the activity, that's a Hebbian learning rule. So that's just rewritten here in slightly different form. Um, we put an epsilon here to just sort of control the level of, of the amount of change that we have at each time step. So this is the simplest learning rule that implements the Hebbian principle. Anyone guess what a problem here might be? I've kind of mentioned it already. With that learning rule, what happens if you sort of have a neuron doing that all the time? Yeah, yeah, that's right. There's nothing in here that actually reduces the weights again, and the problem is that if a neuron, an input is somewhat strong, right, and it activates the neuron, that connection will strengthen and then the input, the correlation will increase as a result and the weight will grow and grow and grow and keep growing and so there's no mechanism here to really prevent. Things from growing just indefinitely and that is the problem you will observe if you make a network of those of neurons with those synapses between them and they're recurrently connected you will end up with a network where everything is active all the time essentially so. So, yeah, so learning is unstable in this network. OK, uh, OK, let me comment quickly on this learning rate here, um, because that's another one that is interesting. So the learning rate is the amount of change that every pairing produces. Now If you want to gradually learn something, maybe for statistical learning where you are processing a lot of information, that learning rate can be set to a small number, so every presentation of some new input will lead to a gradual, small change of the weights. But if you want to learn something very quickly, and that's called maybe one shot learning, one shot learning is you experience something once and you know forever what's happened. Um, you have to increase that epsilon to a high value because you have to make sure that all the weights get adjusted in the right way. And so again there's a trade-off. If you do that for statistical learning, then you start learning only the most recent information and forget everything else, right? So that's a little. The problem of this learning route. Well, with um with respect to the, to the explosion of synaptic weights, there are well motivated learning rules or modifications of this rule to deal with that. So one way is to introduce a bound on the weight, a maximum weight, and there's something even a little cooler that you can do is because you can say. For all the synapses that a neuron has, you specify a maximum that all of them together can have in terms of their weight, right? And so if one synapse increases their weight, then the other synapses have to decrease a little bit. That can be it's kind of a competitive mechanism where synapses try to become stronger at the expense of the others, and you start getting competitions between synapses. And that's an interesting form of learning because it can, um, it can produce uh uh factorised representations and so I'm not getting into that, but it's, it's, it's really interesting um aspect. Well, there's, there's also a possibility to add weight decay term here. This is the 3rd 1 here is the so-called covariance rule, rule where you can have negative weight changes if the activity of the neuron is below the average activity of the neuron over some time. So in these two cases here we have, we are allowing negative weight changes essentially to happen and that kind of can lead to a balance where. Potentiation and depression of the synapses can on average cancel out and you get stable learning. So, yeah, lots of literature, lots of work being done on that because when people, I mean, this, this, this work started in the 1970s, there's a number of different learning rules that have been proposed, um. Uh, that there's a lot of theory around it and so on. What is funny though is that none of these learning rules really performs in any way like back propagation learning performs for artificial systems. So there's no good example in my, in my knowledge of an artificial system that uses heavy learning and really shows, um, um. A kind of biology or animal-like or even humanlike performance in learning. So there's a surprising gap between the models and what the models can really produce. Back propagation is still the state of the art learning rule, even though we think it's probably not entirely biologically plausible. OK, um, So now we can take a Hebbian rule. So I've shown here, I've shown you how you can make Hebbian rules stable. You can easily equally go and make them sort of more fit with experimental results that people have found over the years. So that's one route. Another modification we can do now to make these learning rules implement different forms of learning. If you remember back in the beginning we had these different forms and we had. Distinguished between supervised and unsupervised learning. And here's an extension that um has been proposed to add a supervision signal of some sort to the learning rule. So here's an equation that again shows the the synaptic change, and that is just written down as a general function of the pre and post synaptic activity. So it could be the product, it could be a product and a weight decay, and so on. So one of those things from the previous slide we can add here. And then, but then it has a 3rd factor that is essentially multiplicative and it gates the learning of the synapse, and there's a whole number of things that this can encode this 3rd input, so it could be a reward, it could be a reward prediction error. You can, you can already remember that because that's a key quantity in reinforcement learning. Um, it could be something like novelty or surprise, um, that comes from this. Could be a prediction error if you have a, a prediction, uh, computation going on, or it could even be a back propagation error that you're propagating back through, through, through the weights. Um, so, so then you, you still have a heavy modification of the weight, but that now depends on some kind of context, right? It might only be switched on. If you, I don't know, if you're in a certain state, I mean, the, the Maybe, maybe if you have a painful experience because you, you, you touched a hot surface or something like that, that will for sure cause learning to be stronger and it might be represented as such a factor here on the on the biological side. This is where we think the neuromodulators that we know about might play a big role, um, most prominently dopamine because dopamine has been shown to be really central to reinforcement learning as we will see in a week after next, but other ones as well, um, so those are substances that can change the activity of neuron either directly or through some kind of molecular cascade. Which are released by neurons and which are associated with With uh certain, certain states, uh, um, in, in the brain essentially. So those, so, so this is a, this is a super generic form of a learning rule and as with the Hebbian learning rule, a lot of variations of that have been studied, mostly in conjunction with experimental data to, to explain um forms of learning. But as before, none of these rules really have been shown to perform in a way that back propagation works. So machine learning doesn't, the, the people working in machine learning, they don't essentially care about this because they haven't found it useful so far. OK, um, so let's see what these rules can learn. So this is going back now to Donald Hebb, and these are sketches from the book where he was looking at different recurrently connected circuits. So recurrent circuits are circuits like the Hopfield net where there are loops between connections of the neurons, right? So you have a network of neurons and they're essentially all connected with each other in some way, right? And so in in figure A, you see, you see an example of a real circuit that was um that was known about from the anatomy. This is an oculomotor system, uh, I think in a bird. And then we have various versions of recurrently connected circuits here where the arrows indicate the flow of the information of the the direction of the, of the uh of the signal and. Here, for instance, the number corresponds to the weights. And so, so, so this, this example in E, for instance, has a, has a reverberating circuit, um. In it which has two separate, separate circuits that can reverberate each independently because they're only weakly interconnected, and that's how Donald Happ thought about how the how the brain essentially creates representations of of things in the outside world by strengthening such recurrent connections. Um, this is not exactly true, but there's, there's certainly a grain of truth in this, um, so. It, it It's been taken forward in in more in a context of of what what we call an assembly, and an assembly is basically a group of neurons that through their connectivity are representing a particular object or category or whatever it is. So here we have apples and bananas, we have neurons, and we have a connectivity that will um. will represent the banana and another one that represents the the the apple. Now this would suggest that such assemblies are separated spatially, that different groups of neurons are responsible for the banana and other different groups are responsible for the apple. That's not the case. We know that. And this leads on to what we saw last time yesterday, the Hovit net. You got these assemblies, but they're highly overlapping and they're separated by these um by by by states where you are flowing back into one of these attraction basins that I talked about so that's the sort of modern view of Hebbian assemblies that we now accept. Um, here is examples of such assemblies from, um, data. So. This is, uh, these are recordings, two sets of recordings done in rodents where the animal was walking along a linear corridor, just a long corridor, and brain activity was measured in the hippocampus, and we know that the hippocampus has these spatially selective cells, so they are, they're called place cells because they essentially encode place. When the animal is at a particular location, then a particular cell will fire that corresponds to that location, and every time the animal goes back to that location, that cell will become active and each location, so the whole, whole environment is covered by these place cells. And what is shown here in both of these cases is different recording techniques, different numbers of neurons, is that when you record and look at the activity. Um, in a sort of unordered way, you see that some neurons are active at particular locations only. If you order them then in terms of the, the temporal, uh, uh, uh, do a temporal ordering of the activity, you see, it's better seen in this part here. You see these sequences that correspond to, um, to the movement through the environment. So you're going. It's indicated here as an A B C D, so that's a sequence of of places on this linear track. Occasionally you see you see these individual parts of the sequence reoccur, but when the animal is moving, um, you would you would you would observe this consistent sequencing. A sequence and interestingly those sequences after an experience those sequences are played back even spontaneously and that's a hallmark of an assembly because an assembly should once it gets activated and even by chance it should sort of complete itself and and play itself back or put the system into the state that corresponds to the assembly. So this is uh this is data here which shows this phenomenon so um. So again, this is the same situation. A rodent has experienced this linear corridor, been running through it, and um here we see one episode of running. So this is the speed of the animal and here it's running through the environment over as a function, so plotted as a function of time. And on why we have the cell number and the cells are ordered by position by their selective position so we can see this nice progression here of activity as the animal runs through. Now interestingly, if so the animal is not doing this just once but doing it many times because it gets rewarded for that and. Um, at the end points of the corridor, it might, it might stay for a little while to collect some, some reward. Um, we see even when the animal is stationary, we see these sequences being played back in the hippocampus, even though the animal is not moving. And those sequences appear after an experience. So before the animal has experienced that particular environment, you wouldn't be able to see those sequences necessarily. But once once it's it's been through the corridor a few times, these sequences appear and they get replayed even when the animal is not moving. Again, that is what we think should be an assembly because spontaneous activity can can can can randomly essentially trigger the activity. Interestingly, these assemblies can be played back forwards and backwards, so you can have the reverse replay as well. Indicating maybe some kind of symmetry in the connectivity that is also required in the Hopfield net. In Part B, we see the same thing except now. Um, here, we see what happens during or before, um, uh, experiencing the environment, then during, um, task performance or running forth and back across the corridor, and then during sleep afterwards. So, um, and it turns out that after an experience, there's a lot of replay which is associated with previous experiences during sleep. And this is thought to be a way of consolidating information in the episodic memory and perhaps even storing it in a cortical circuit so to make it more permanent and and to put it into some kind of schema or more organised scheme. So it's it's well known that if animals. Have this replay, then their performance in the same task if they, for instance, have to perform some kind of maze task where they have to make decisions and remember them. So if this replay happens during sleep, then the performance in the task after they sleep is better than if this replay does not happen if it's if it's somehow blocked. And I mean we we know maybe from experience ourselves that. A good night's sleep often helps a little bit with studying and so on, so I recommend that uh when you prepare for the exam because your brain isn't, isn't just doing nothing when you're sleeping, it's actually quite busy looking at what you've been doing during the day and replaying things and so on. So this falls under the, under the heading of memory consolidation and it's fundamentally probably what's behind this. This, this idea of complementary memory systems is, so we have episodic memories. You've seen those memories are not very long lasting. They might last a day or a few days, but then they decay again. But some of that information that is initially in episodic memory is actually available in a more sort of generalised form later on in a more semantic memory, and that is what we think this replay is responsible for. So we have here neural assemblies formed in the hippocampus. They can be explained through heavy and plasticity, fundamentally how they're formed, but what happens then beyond that is, is, is far more complicated. Right, OK, that's it, uh, on learning memory. Got, got a quick question or two, happy to answer if there's anything. You'd like to ask. All right, So your mind might be on the assignment, um, as I wrote as an announcement, um, and said yesterday, there will be labs next week. Go and if you need help um with coding and, uh, the quiz is open as well till Monday 5 o'clock. So please go and look at that. Uh, there's a segment on memory and learning and also what Maitly did the week before. And yeah, and I'll see you again in 2 weeks.
