SPEAKER 0
not. I Swing. Something is very important.

SPEAKER 1
OK, good afternoon. Here we go again. Um, more today on learning memory and in this lecture, so after covering a bit of learning memory more generally in the, on Tuesday, Today We're going to talk about the model, a model for memory, and it's a model that is also in the assignment. So you have, you have an opportunity to play with that a little bit. Um, oh yeah, before I start, um, so, just yesterday, I detected a mistake in the, in the timetable that was given to you. So according to that, this week and next week, there are no tutorials, and that was a mistake by the timetabling unit. Um, we had everything set up for this and next week for labs. So, so there will be labs next week. Uh, on usual place, usual time, and, uh, just go to those if you, if you need help with the assignment. That's the last set of labs that we have in the course, OK. So, just uh if you don't see them in your timetable, you can go and uh look up the locations and the times in the previous weeks and the labs will be in the same place and time, right? OK. So, back to this. So, today we're gonna talk about um A, uh, model of associative memory. Um, I will jump ahead a little bit here. We, we're gonna talk about associative memory as, as one form of memory. Next, uh, tomorrow, I will introduce some other forms and put that into context a little bit, but, um, here we're focusing on that specifically. So it's, it's the Hopfield network. Um, this is, this is quite famous. It's got the Nobel Prize last year, Nobel Prize for Physics, um, along with, uh, so this was Uh, created by John Hopfield. He won the Nobel Prize along with Geoff Hinton, who is another big, big name in this, in this area. You might have come across that name, um, called the Godfather of AI sometimes. So, so this was hugely important because it was, it was a big step towards understanding how memories can be stored and laid out and also retrieved. In these networks of neurons that are recurrently connected to each other. And so I'll explain how that works. Um, And um. And tell you a little bit about the implications of what that has, so I'll give you some comparisons to neural data at the end. Good. So let's um start with a definition of associative memory. So again, I want, I want to use that comparison to computer memory because I think it's, it's, it's good to highlight that contrast. So, as we said already last time, retrieval um of a computer memory address based. You need to know the address, where the memory is, and then you can ask that uh for, for, for, for that piece of information to be given to your processor for, for some computation. Um, that, of course, is, as I've mentioned already, that's error-prone because you might, you, you, it's enough to just randomly flip one of the bits that encode the address and you cannot find it anymore. And of course, um, you might know that um there are strategies to mitigate that, check sums and so on, that can deal with occasional errors that might happen. Now, um, in the brain, this is completely different because memory retrieval in the brain is extremely error tolerant. Um And, and the main reason for this is that memories are not accessed by their location, but by the content. And this is what associative means. So associative means that you um might supply a partial cue, a part of a memory, uh, a certain aspect of a memory. And then the brain can complete the information, complete that memory autonomously and provide some recall of the complete memory. And we'll see exactly that happen in the Hop field network. Um So while in our computer memories are localised at a particular location, um, in the brain, they're distributed across many neurons. And interestingly, so I've talked to you about um grandmother cells or Jennifer Aniston neurons. So those kind of things might suggest maybe there's a particular neuron that's responsible for a particular object in the world. That's not how it really works. It's um What, what we really have is, is, is, is what's called a population code where many neurons participate in the storage and recall of a particular memory, and each neuron might be involved in multiple memories simultaneously. So, one neuron might, might, might be active for your grandmother and might also be active at the same time uh for a Jennifer Aniston recall, for instance. Um, this nature makes, makes this form of memory highly error intolerant because there's a lot of redundancy in the storage, right? If you have many neurons involved, if one of those neurons just drops out for whatever reason, then the other neurons can still complete the memory and, and retrieve it successfully. And this is treated in depth in um In a, in a, in a really good book by David McKay. Uh, it's, it's a book on statistical learning. Uh, I really recommend that to anyone who wants to go towards machine learning. It's a great book. It, it, it covers all sorts of different topics, uh, including Optimal encoding, compression, and all these kind of things. And he, he spends a lot of time talking about different strategies of error corrections, which are most statistical strategies. And so he gives an example in the context of the Hopfit model, which is also covered. Uh, which I've put here on the slide. I don't know if you can, if, if you, you might be too young for that, but there's, there's, there's a sentence here in the book which says an American politician who was very intelligent and whose politician father did not like broccoli. So, if you're my age, you will know who that person would be. Um, even though that sentence has an error in it. He doesn't, I mean, you can, you can sort of work that out yourself if you want. So, You, we, we're given some partial cues, the broccoli is a, is a very strong cue, and we're given one piece of false information, uh, but we can, we, we still know what's meant. That is the, the kind of error-correcting property that I'm speaking about, right? Um, it can also be seen at, at the same time as a, as an ability to generate, uh, generalise because we're able to um recognise things under different contexts, right? And, uh, um, um. So, so some parts of the information that you're, that you're, that you're receiving might be different from the information that you had when you first stored the memory, but you're still able to retrieve that if the cues are strong enough. That's the idea. So yeah, so this is the robustness of this kind of memory, and associative memory is this extreme, extremely robust form. Um So I've got here um a very old study which is among the first to show how this works in brains uh experimentally. So all these ideas that I'm, I'm, I'm gonna talk about and these models, they were conceived before people really had a good, good understanding of what happens in brains, uh, in memories, but this is one of the first ones, in 1989, that was, I guess, 4 or 5 years after the Hopfield model was introduced. And um this is a study where um Uh, this was done in, in a Tiger salamander, and these are recordings from neurons which encode or which are responsive to particular odorants. So this is in the olfactory system. This is the, this, um, this is the sense of smell. And, um, a problem that system faces is that there are many, many different combinations of odorants which, which uh might be relevant to an organism, right? So, you might want to um maybe head towards food and avoid certain other smells that, that, that, um, that could be indicate toxicity or danger and so on. And then, there are many, many molecules that you can use for that purpose, and olfactory systems of, um, of, of vertebrates are really sophisticated. Um, we have, we have, uh, we have receptors for many, many of these odorants, and there's a huge space of possibilities of combinations of these odorants that we need to deal with. And at the same time, Um, smelling is a pretty noisy sense because um you, you're dealing with a small number of molecules potentially that you need to pick up, um, they're highly diluted in air and, and combined with other molecules. So the signal that you're getting from your receptors is fairly noisy. So it's a, it's a sort of challenging technical problem if you think about it from that point of view to reliably use odorant cues. And, um, so what this study showed here is, um, is a form of associative encoding which gives rise to this highly robust um uh uh uh a, a highly, highly robust system that can reliably um detect odorants. So what we're seeing here on the top left is basically a bit of brain surface. Each dot would be a neuron, and the size of the circle is the response magnitude of each of these neurons to different odorant molecules, and you can just by comparing these visually, you can see that each of those odorants gives rise to a different pattern of activations. Um In in in this protein B, we see the response of individual neurons, many individual neurons to two different odorants, and again, we, we can see that just visually, if you look at the response profile, they differ, they diff they differ between those two odorants. So, so what does that mean? Well, it means that multiple neurons are simultaneously involved in responding to a particular odorant. And um this is summarised down here in C where on the vertical axis we have 8 different odorant molecules. And on the right here we have something, I forgot what the number was, um. Maybe about 50 or so neurons and every, every time we see a black. Rectangle here, that means that that neuron was responding to this particular odorant. And so what you can see is that um There are some neurons, um, like this first one here. Which only respond to one particular odorant or, or here this neuron, it is only active for one odorant, but those neurons are actually in the minority. A lot of neurons respond to multiple of these odorants uh at the same time. And this is what conveys this redundancy because you can, you can now, you can, you can look at this plot as a kind of barcode almost matrix where. Different combinations of black and white squares help you to identify a particular odorant. And so if, um, because I said smelling is is is a is a noisy sense, so not all these neurons might always be activated in exactly the same way, but because there's complementary information for multiple neurons, you can still pull out information about which odorant was present. So that's the idea. Behind associative encoding, we're looking at multiple neurons at the same time. We're looking at what they're doing together and that gives us um an approximation of um of uh what the input was. So, a, a, a very first model that was, that's among the, the first models of, um, uh, of, of this kind of um storage and, and retrieval of memory is the so-called Wilshaw network. And I bring this up because this comes from here. This comes out of Edinburgh, so this is, um, you can, you can see here. This was done in the Department of Machine and Intelligence and Perception at the University of Edinburgh. So this is the precursor to the School of Informatics. And David Wiltshaw is an emeritus professor here. Peter Bunnemann is still around. Um, so, so this was, this was, this was one of the first models created here in Edinburgh a long time ago. Um, one, among the, David Wilshire was among the, the first people to, to, to start this idea of computational neuroscience, so using computational models to try to understand, understand phenomena in, in, in, uh, in, in the brain. This is a very, very simple model, but it's extremely powerful and it kind of um gets at the, at the, at the core of associative memory. So on the left here, we have a bunch of inputs. This could be sensory inputs. I mean these are maybe neurons that are, um, could be visual neurons or um. Neurons sensitive to odours and so on. And so those neurons produce Particular patterns of activations and now these neurons are sending their signals across here horizontally and at each intersection, we have a connection. And those connections are um are activating these neurons which are um aligned here at the top, and those are the output neurons. And so, the task now of this model is to associate a particular pattern of inputs with a desired pattern of outputs, right? So, for example, you could say, um, the inputs are images. And then we want the output to be active in a certain way when there's a car in an image or a dog in an image would be a different output, and so on, right? Turns out you can you can train this model, you can train, so, so, so the, the parameters of the model are um the strength of these connections, of these synapses here between those um between those, those groups of neurons. And um because this is a fairly simple setup, it's possible to show this precisely mathematically that you can always find a combination of, of, of weights or parameters that allow you to distinguish between different sets of input patterns. And once this network is trained, you, you, you can, you can start presenting partial cues. So for instance, you can only only give activations of some of these neurons and leave the other ones off. And the output would still be recovered, the output layer would still recover the correct answer. So this works up until a certain, certain point when the performance breaks down. And equally, some of these synapses might be not reliable and might not transmit. But the network is still because of this um redundant information can still produce the correct output. So this is the association, um, the way association, associative memory works at its core where um. You associated a, a, a desired output with, with, um, with, with a particular set of inputs. Um So, this model is simple because it doesn't really involve any kind of dynamical phenomenon, right? So you pass an input in, you pass it through the synapses, and you, you get an output. And the Hopwit model that we're gonna talk about extends that by, by introducing a um um by introducing dynamics. So, let's see. So, the goal of Um, OK, let's, let's rewind. So this is an associative memory because of this associative nature now. Um What, what we're doing in the next step is that we want a network not just to form these association by means of, of the connections, but we want associations to reinforce themselves, right? So, if we get, if we get, if we get an input that's partial, that isn't the complete information, we wanna be able for a network to automatically and, and autonomously complete the pattern that's shown to it. In order to restore completely restore previous memory. So this is the outer associative aspect now that we're introducing. And this is the goal, so we wanna be able to store certain patterns, and patterns, you can, I mean patterns could be images, it could be any kind of information, but for our purposes here, we're basically thinking about maybe bit patterns of zeros and ones that we want, we want to remember and and recall. Um, now, instead of associating, like in the virtual network, each pattern with the desired output, we want now associate each pattern with itself so that when we show a, a, a corrupted version of that pattern, we can restore the original pattern, um, again. And so that's, that in turn will allow this form of generalisation I spoke about which is that partial or imperfect cues should still lead to a full, full, um. retrieval of of of a memory. So, Let's set up the model first, so we're going to start again with our simple Mlo Pits neurons. So you've seen these a couple of times before. Um, the difference now is that we're introducing an explicit time axis. So we are now modelling dynamics of these networks over time steps. So how this works is that um we have a network of M neurons here. They're all connected to each other through these weights, WIJ. And um So the, the, the neurons are denoted here by S and then, At any given point in time, the network is in a particular um activation state, so some neurons are off and other neurons are on, right? So they are 01 binary neurons. And so to compute the update from the current to the next time step. We would just, um, as, as, as in the perceptron, we would sum together all the all the activations of the neurons and multiply them by the, by the weight um between them. So if we want to update neuron number I here, we um collect activity from all the other neurons, multiply that with the respective weight, um, sum that up, and then we might have a biassed term here as well, that's not essential for the function of the network and then then we pass that through this step function as you've seen before to compute the activity of that uh neuron at the next time step, right? So There are some constraints for to this model that are very important. Um, the most important one is that the weights, um, are symmetric, so the weight between neuron. I and J has to be equal to the weight, to the reverse weight between neuron J and I. So this is important for stability in these networks. But other than that, we can, we can update the whole network synchronously, time step by step, step, compute the new activations, and then go forward in time, or we can randomly pick a unit, update it, go to the next time step, do that again. That really doesn't make any difference. Yeah, I've, I've, I've mentioned the bias term here. This is really not very important, but it can make the network it's, it's basically a parameter that can help to improve the network performance in terms of capacity. So under those conditions. The dynamics of the network will over time converge to what we call a stable fixed point. A stable fixed point is a point where the where the activity of the network no longer changes. It will just stay at a certain pattern of activations forever. And under symmetric weights, that's guaranteed to happen. So, uh, well, not entirely, but almost, so, believe me. So, this network will, you can, you can put it into some initial condition, you can assign random activations to the neurons, then you let it run for a few time steps and it will settle into a state from which it won't um It won't leave anymore. Now, why is this useful? Well, um, OK, so this is, this is here, the, the formal definition of this fixed point. It is, uh, we, we are in a fixed point when the activation at the next time step of each neuron is exactly the same as at the current time step, right? Um, and, um, we can, specifically, we, we're interested in something that is called a stable fixed point. And that is a fixed point that if it's perturbed, if, if we have a network that is in a fixed point and we perturb it slightly, maybe we flip some of the bits um randomly. Then it'll quickly return back to this original fixed point, right? Um, This is sometimes in the dynamical systems literature. I don't know if you're from physics, you might know that, that's, that's also called an attractor, um, and It's kind of, hm, do we have chalk. So it, it relates very much to what Maitley talked about, yeah, yeah. When she was teaching you about um gradient descent. So it's this idea. That You kind of have a landscape and in gradient descent, what you would basically try to do is to bring, so this is a, a landscape which is maybe an error landscape, and gradient descent is a method that guarantees that you get to a certain minimum in this error landscape, right? So, now, the same thing is happening here in these networks when they go towards stable fixed points. Basically, um, So, so this is now not an error landscape, but it's what we call an energy landscape. And this network tries to find these fixed points here, which sit at minimum levels of energy of the network. This is a sort of um idea that comes from physics. It's, it's, uh, it's to do with the activation of the network, with the activation level of the network. When it sits here, And you, so this is, this corresponds to a particular configuration of the network, a particular activation pattern in the network. Um, it will just stay there. And then if you go and flip a few bits, you effectively change that energy of the network, um, but because the network has this tendency to go to this fixed point, it will basically return back here. So it's basic, it's the same analogy that you've encountered when you were looking at gradient descent. That applies to these networks. Now, here, here, we are not changing the parameters. The weights are stable, right? It's the activity patterns of the network that go into this fixed point. In gradient descent, you would try to change the parameters to to find such a point. So, it's, it's, it's, it's what I've written here. It's a ball, like a ball in a valley, right? If you give it a little push, it'll, it'll go back. So why is this a good idea? Well, um, the idea now is that these fixed points here could correspond, these very stable patterns, they could correspond to stored memories. If we have a memory, um, If we want, if, if we would like to store and retrieve a particular patterns of activation, if that's our memory. Then we would like to put that into a such an energy minimum here. So that we are, when we are nearby in configuration space of the network, that we would automatically fall into this point, right? So, a, um a state maybe here, slightly away from the minimum, then would maybe correspond to a corrupted version of that memory initially. Um, the, the dynamics would then guarantee that, that, um, the memory is recalled in full. This is, this is what we want to do. So that's, that, that idea is neat, but it's actually not so easy to think about how you would do that because you would need to structure the weights in a particular way to make sure that the memory that you store corresponds exactly to such a fixed point. Um, and it turns out, there is, there is a rule, uh, a learning rule which, well, when you, when you understand it, is, is, is surprisingly simple which achieves exactly that. So, Let's set that up carefully. So we We would like to store a number of patterns, and by patterns I mean Patterns of activation, patterns of activity in the network which consist of zeros and ones, so we can treat them as binary patterns, basically. We want to store these in the network and we would like each pattern to be at a minimum, at a minimum like this, right? And then you can see if we corrupt, present a corrupted version of that pattern, the network should be able to go back to this. So, um, These patterns are denoted P here, we might want to store N of those, um, and we have M neurons available for that. Um, so, It Um, turns out that It's possible to make use of the fact that within a pattern, certain neurons will be active together and other neurons will be inactive together. And those neurons that are active together should basically reinforce themselves. And so, um, What we can do here is we can um make the weight proportional to the correlation um of the activations within each pattern. So what we're doing here is we have, we, we are, we are computing weights um for all the end patterns that we want to store. As just the product of the individual, all individual pairs of neurons within that pattern. So those products, that product will be 1 if both neurons are active and it will be 0 otherwise. So what we're really, what we're really computing here is the correlations within the patterns. And every time two neurons are coactive, that leads to a strong weight, OK? And then uh so it strengthens, it increases the weight between those two neurons. And if the if one of the neurons is inactive, or both neurons are inactive, then Those those that pair doesn't contribute and the weight will not grow as a result. So what we're getting out of this by using these correlations within the patterns is a weight matrix where for each pattern, the weights between active neurons is stronger than all the other weights, OK. And it turns out that this creates exactly this kind of attractor or fixed point situation that we want to have. So every, every stored pattern now. Uh, is a fixed point in these dynamics. And if we are showing one of the train patterns to the network, if we initialise the network with one of those patterns, then the network is already in this minimum and it will just stay there. And if we're initialising it with a slightly perturbed version of the uh train pattern, then the dynamics will quickly bring it towards the, the, the learned pattern because The, the connections between neurons which are coactive will reinforce um the activity in, in the participating neurons. So Goodness, this is. Maybe the best way is to show it here. So this was done actually by um by a student a bunch of years ago um who was experimenting with Hop-field networks a little bit. So this is a, a Hopwit net which was in this, this was just trained on 11 pattern and we'll see how that looks like uh initially and then it was shown a perturbed version of that pattern. So that's the input to the network. Each pixel in this picture is, is a neuron in the network. And um a white pixel is 0 and a black pixel is, is a 1, so it's an active neuron. OK, so that's the input and then we let the dynamics run for just uh time step and more time step and more time step and a little bit further, and I think that's it, yeah. So this is the end. So this is the final pattern. This is the train pattern that uh was stored in the network and You can see here how gradually, what happens gradually travelling down towards the valley towards this fixed point of the network. Um, and this will happen for as long as, as the, the initial pattern was sufficiently close to the train pattern. So, um, Oh, this is actually, ah I see. Michel Disler, I wanted to have this on the previous slide. OK. So here's, here's another example. This is taken from the book um by David McKay that I mentioned earlier, which has a very nice chapter on the Hopfield network. If you're really interested in this topic, um, this is a great, great chapter which um summarises it really well. So this is a network which was trained on these 4 digits here. So, again, we have um uh each pixel is a neuron, um. White is a 0 and black is, is, uh, is an active neuron is a 1. And um these pictures here from B to M show different forms of uh recall that a network perform and the this, this matrix here is the weight matrix um of this uh of um of the network that was computed for those um for uh stimuli. So. In B, we see a case where um a slightly corrupted D was presented and then um that, that extra pixel was removed and the networks ends up in the correct fixed point. I should have looked up, so C is the same. It correctly finds here it takes a bit longer, so this is a more perturbed pattern, so it takes two steps to go back to the correct J. C is correct. M is correct. This one here, OK, a very perturbed pattern goes to the D. This one goes to the end, and here are some interesting ones. So in I, um. We, we, we, we actually see something that is called a spurious attractor. Because, OK, so let me step back for a minute. So if you make a network like this with a random weight matrix which is symmetric. It will, the network will have some attractors. There are some random patterns basically that are just determined by the by the random initialization of the weight matrix, right? So these networks always have attractors and they could be a random pattern if you store a bunch of patterns in the network. You might have, you will have those patterns stored, but you will also have other, um, they're called spurious attractors which just are sitting in the network because the network has more capacity available. And here we see an example of a spurious attractor. So this might look like a mixture of um of uh two of the stored patterns. This is something that wasn't trained. But it's still in the network. So some, some, some, some inputs can actually lead to uh uh network activities that have nothing to do with the, with the data they were trained on. Um, here's another mixed one, another attractor. Um, here is a corrupt corrupted M that it ends up in. Um In L we see a another corrupted version, a spurious attractor. Um, and here, we see something that looks very corrupted, but it actually is, um, the inverse of a stable, um, pattern. I think, I don't remember which one it is now. So that L. That's this one here, yeah. So, so this last one is the inverse of this one, and it turns out that every pattern in the network also has an inverse um pattern that is a stable attractor. So that's, that's, that's the kind of things that May happen in, in a network like this, um, but generally you're under some conditions, we get to that, you're basically guaranteed to be able to retrieve any of the patterns that are stored in this network, um, from a, from the correct queue for sure and from a partial queue with a high probability. Um, speaking of probabilities, it's worth mentioning that these networks are completely deterministic. There's nothing stochastic or random about them, um. Everything, uh, uh, is, is, is completely, so, so, so every input pattern will always lead to the same output pattern. That's maybe a little different to how uh things work in the brain. OK, so, um, a few sort of facts and figures on the Hopefield network. Um, it actually, these networks have a surprisingly high capacity. And um I've written down the number here, so this is is proportional to the number of of neurons in the network. It's about 14% of the number of neurons, and that is true for um for patterns which have an equal number of zeros and 1s. We call that sparseness of the patterns. That's the average. Average value of the of all patterns, which is 0.5 in this case, the capacity is much higher for sparse patterns where most activations are zero and only a few 1, then you, you get, you get the same linear behaviour but the capacity increases. And so, if we're thinking we, we maybe a hippocampus might have uh many hundreds of thousands of neurons, um, then you can, you can see that that's a fairly large capacity that a network like this has already in terms of just distinct patterns that it can store reliably and recall reliably. And there's one. Interesting property here. So what we've done so far and with this learning rule is we've trained the network with all patterns at the same time. But what you would do in a real network is to sequentially train the network because think of an episodic memory, you have various experiences over time and you need to store some of them away for a little bit. And in the Hopfield network, a sequential training will basically lead to the forgetting of the older memories and uh a a more reliable storage of the more recent memories. And that's actually a phenomenon that the hippocampus shows, right? So more distant memories are gradually overwritten and forgotten, as we've seen last time. Um, yeah, it's not entirely robust to noise, but I think that's, that's a detail. The main, um, criticism of that model when it came around was that it's biologically actually quite implausible because this connectivity of symmetric weights that clearly doesn't exist in any circuit that's known to be involved in memory. So there's, there's a bit of a difference here between what, what this model proposes and what we're actually finding in the brain. Um, but I would say, and I'm gonna show a few things on this now, that the general idea of these attractors or fixed points that um that has kind of stood the test of time and is, is, is, is um an accepted way of thinking about that. So, let's Talk a little bit about observations from data now. So, um, If we're You, you can extend this type of model here to a stochastic version where neurons might randomly activate and deactivate over time, right? That network will still be able to restore memories and that's maybe a little bit more of a brain-like situation because in the brain there's a lot of random spontaneous activity. Neurons are not fully deterministic. And here's an observation of um comparing spontaneous activity to evoked activity, um, which shows that essentially um patterns of activation of, of individual neurons recorded simultaneously. That, um, so those activation patterns that are caused by certain stimuli are also observed in spontaneous activity, and this is something that we would predict from the Hopfield network because the Hopfield network basically would spend maybe some time in one of those, those, um, valleys here and then some random noise might drive it over to a neighbouring valley. Right? So it won't stay there forever, but it would, it would kind of flip through those valleys and preferentially show those activity patterns which are associated with valleys, whereas all the other patterns in between, we would rarely see because they're less stable and the network would move away from this. And this is basically what we're seeing here. So, um, here we see a bunch of frames of activity patterns of neurons. Um, they're recorded in the visual cortex and then they're compared to activity patterns which are evoked by a visual stimulus and essentially what they did here was to, to measure the overlap between those, those patterns which are, which are evoked by, by a stimulus and the spontaneous patterns and it turns out that those evoked patterns that. appear much more frequently than expected by chance. So the network seems to be jumping between those more attractive states and avoids those states that are rarely accessed through stimulation. So we can interpret this as some evidence that this, this attractive dynamics do exist in the brain. Here's, here's, here's an interesting one. So, it turns out it's, it's actually possible to um to write such um memories into a circuit. So the way this is done here is through a technique called optogenetics. It's possible to transfect neurons with a protein, with a virus that carries a protein. Which makes it possible to stimulate these neurons with light so that they become electrically active when light is, is, is shown on, on those neurons. So that's called optogenetics. It's a tool in neuroscience to modify the activity of a circuit. And so what was done in these experiments here. Is um A selected number of neurons were targeted and stimulated at the same time, and this is a bit like in the Hopfield network, um, strengthening connections between neurons by uh by by coactivity. So the expectation here is that if you target certain neurons. And you stimulate them at the same time, then the connections between them will strengthen because there must be some mechanism that produces these um these um uh strong weights between neurons that lead to these attract uh um. Attractive states and it turns out if this is done sufficiently long. Then in ongoing spontaneous activity, one starts to see by much higher than chance, one starts to see um This imposed activity pattern, it just starts to appear in the spontaneous activity, uh, higher than chance, and that again means that the activity, the network spends more activity in this valley here. And then it's possible through stimulation to just evoke. The activity in the whole, in this whole um group of neurons. So in this case, only one neuron which was part of this, this assembly or ensemble that was trained was stimulated and that led to the reactivation of much of the rest of this uh uh group of neurons. So this is the same mechanism basically that um the Hopfield network um predicts. OK, um, So yeah, so that's a quick run through the Hopfield net. Um, got time for some questions. Mm I hope that wasn't too quick. I hope you got the main idea. I mean, the technical details aren't. And very important in this case and in the assignment. You are training essentially a network on Some images and you can, you can, you can see that behaviour for yourself. Yeah. You know how you said like it's not like applicable

SPEAKER 2
in like normal biology because it's not, you can't have like symmetric weights. So, the, the, the issue with the symmetric weights is

SPEAKER 1
that, that guarantees, so you can show mathematically that when with this with this symmetric weight matrix, you um have a stable network. It doesn't explode, it doesn't um it doesn't become silent. You are guaranteed to have these fixed points and that's why this whole thing works. Now, With asymmetric weight matrices, you can still get that, but you, there's no known good training or learning rule that would guarantee that these fixed points are actually imprinted into the network. So the symmetric weights are really there to make this learning rule here work, and we can imagine that the brain might have other ways of of of dealing with that. So asymmetric weights does not mean this doesn't work. It's just in the context of this model that we need stability, um, because otherwise we won't be, we won't have guaranteed patterns. I mean, what would happen if you took a matrix like this here, a trained matrix, and you made it slightly asymmetric, you, you might have a network that still can retrieve memories, but maybe. In some for some input patterns, maybe all the units will simultaneously turn on because there's a path in the network that just leads to the activation of all units, so you've got an element of instability in there. So this is more a sort of technical mathematical reason um rather than um uh a, a strong constraint on how it could be working in the brain. Any other questions? Right. OK, I think you need to digest that a little, and I think if you do the assignment and play with it, hopefully you get an intuition um for how it works. So, what we're doing tomorrow then is to look a a bit about neuroplasticity. So that's the mechanism that actually modifies weights between neurons and we'll see a little bit how that relates to those memory models, right? See you tomorrow.

SPEAKER 0
Oh I.
