SPEAKER 0
Right. But can you show me your. You make sense. Uh.

SPEAKER 1
OK, hello. Good afternoon. Good to see you again. Um. So So this week, the plan is we're gonna talk about uh reinforcement learning, um. That's an important topic, and on Friday. Maybe we will actually do a little bit of Catch up on things that you hadn't quite completed and then we'll do a more general question and answer session. We'll talk a bit about courses you can take in the future and so on. But those next two lectures are gonna be about reinforcement learning. Um, I just put this up first because I mentioned it in an earlier lecture. This is from an old set of slides, but I thought I'll tell you about it because it's, it's kind of interesting. In the light of what AI is currently trying to do, so this describes, um, what's called Moravic's paradox, um, and this is an idea that was first articulated in this form by, um, Hans Moravic who, um, was at Carnegie Mellon University, a roboticist. And roboticists in the 1980s were really frustrated because computer science was making great progress and everybody was talking about the fantastic things that computers could do so much better than brains like playing chess and so on, but the roboticists really were stuck because they couldn't make the simplest things work. And so he said it is comparably comparatively easy to make computers exhibit other level performance on intelligence tasks. Intelligent tasks or playing checkers. And difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one year old when it comes to perception and mobility. So that's, that's what roboticists really found is that the kind of things that we typically associated with associate with intelligence like being good at math, being good at playing chess, logic, kind of problem solving, and so on, that's actually something that computers are, are, are generally really good at. But when it comes to the sorts of behaviours and things that we do almost intuitively that we don't need to think about, that turns out to be really hard to realise in technology. So, um, this is, um, This was at a time when artificial intelligence was absolutely dominated by symbolic approaches, so I don't know if you've come across this distinction, but what we are talking about here mostly are the more probabilistic approaches, neural networks, um, those kind of things. Uh, rooted more in, in a sort of soft, yeah, how, how would you describe it? Uh, there's no hard logic behind how these systems operate. They learn and adapt to distributions and they model distributions, um, probability distributions and so on. And the symbolic approach is essentially to formulate everything in terms of rules and um. And relationships and at the core of symbolic approaches is a logic approach and that was what artificial intelligence was like in the 1980s. People had discarded neural networks as something that was kind of interesting maybe for brain scientists but not useful in practise. And um Rodney Brooks, I don't know if you know Rodney Brooks, anybody knows the name? Famous roboticist, nobody knows the name, but you know uh you know Roomba, right? The, the, no, so that's a little vacuum cleaner robot that um that was the first vacuum cleaner robot you could buy. Now you can buy many versions of that. But so Rodney Brooks um founded this company called iRobot that then um was producing these sort of consumer devices, very simple things, um, that, that actually work in practise. So he said, um, that, uh, intelligence, according to top AI research, which was still the symbolic age, was the best characterised as the things that highly educated educated male scientists found challenging. So really divorced from reality. And out of that came a bit of a criticism of the whole cognitive science field because cognitive science often tries to isolate phenomena and study them in in in in isolation in very restricted and artificial settings. And more recently over the past 5+ years, I would say that people are more interested in more naturalistic situations. So this is the same in animal research. Animals are trained on tasks that they never encounter in, in, uh, in, in the wild. Um, and so there's been a bit of criticism about that, but I think the pendulum swinging again. So I was just last week I was at a conference where people were arguing well maybe um that might be true that we're not really looking at natural intelligence, but what these experiments when we train animals to do very specific tasks show is the. The adaptability of the brain, right? A brain can learn things um that it was never made for by nature, right? A mouse was never made for pressing levers somewhere to to get rewards or something like that, right? That's not a natural task, but brains have this ability to, to, uh, to adapt to completely new situations and so we maybe after all we're still studying the right thing. So ongoing debate, I just wanted to bring it up because I think it's an interesting. Sort of thought provoking uh um set of ideas. I, I don't have a, a, a particularly strong position on any of that, but sometimes it, it's useful to, uh, think in these terms. Right, let's move to reinforcement learning. So this is a two-part lecture and in fact, in the first part, we are only covering classical conditioning because this is where the whole idea of reinforcement learning comes from. Now, reinforcement learning is a form of learning which, um, which is about learning how to act in a world. And so in robotics, that's been quite extensively used. Reinforcement learning is also used in, in many other settings. So for instance, large language models are, are trained by a procedure called um uh uh. What's it called again? Human feedback loop reinforcement. I did tell you about that. So there's there's the same algorithms that can be used in many, many settings to make essentially um uh models produce appropriate behaviours, and it's an it's, it's especially a useful method for learning where the possible state space is very large. So where there are many different states, the model, the organism can be in. And each states gives rise to a variety of choices in terms of behaviour. And so reinforcement learning is the mechanism by which um systems can learn, can, can learn such, uh, uh, uh, even, even relatively complex behaviours. So next, uh, on Thursday, I'll show you a couple of recent examples of that. Um Now classical conditioning. Is you, you're probably familiar with that. I've got an example here. I thought about examples and I came up with that. So this is what you might have experienced. So you, you have your phone, there's a notification sound or it buzzes, right? And that's kind of a neutral stimulus to start with. There's just something that the device is trying to tell you. So you go and, and you look at the, at your phone and you realise some messages are really nice to have, right? There's something nice coming out of it. It might be rewarding in, in this or that way, right? Maybe it's just somebody you know messaging something nice, whatever it is, right? So what you then do is, um, as you go along, and that happens more and more often, that Um, the notification kind of starts to trigger an expectation of something that is rewarding to you. And then you start checking your phone all the time, maybe even without a notification because you're kind of hoping for that reward again and that is, that is what conditioning is really. So you would learn a regular regularity between events, um, so you have a cue, so in this case that's the notification and that and you learn that predicts an outcome or maybe an action. Um, can, uh, is related to what happens next, right? And learning that relationship, uh, that is conditioning. And we're doing this not very actively, we're doing it actually quite passively, right? We're, we're, we're picking up these, these regularities, these relationships, um, between stimulus, stimuli and outcome, uh, and, and, and. And outcomes or between actions, something that we do and maybe some rewarding outcome of that. So Um, So, so what conditioning does is it links. A cue, a cue means stimulus or some kind of hint that you're getting from the environment to an expectation. It actually doesn't link it directly to the outcome, but it, it links it to an expectation of a certain outcome, and that can be a positive one, right? Or like the the nice message on your phone or whatever it is, right? It can be something negative as well, and that's called fear conditioning. Um, Classic experiments are where a mouse is put into a cage and a tone is paired to a mild electric shock and then mice start freezing. Just when the tone is presented without even that shock being present, so that it can go both ways. It can be a reward. It can be a punishment. And so this form of conditioning is called operant conditioning. Uh, sorry, sorry, classical conditioning. Um, and there's another form which is highly related, which is, uh, the relationship between, uh, performing an action and then a subsequent outcome. Um, so in this case, you actually have to do something in order to get an outcome, and that's called operant conditioning. So as I said, these, these cues can be rewarding or they can be aversive. Um, typically in experiments they're external, they're imposed by the experimenter or by, by your social media company. Um, they can also be internal, um, so internal rewards, vicarious rewards they're called, um. So there doesn't need to be an external event associated with it. You can reward yourself by By Achieving something challenging and feeling good about it, that would be a vicarious reward that functions pretty much in the same way according to this theory. So, here again, some illustrations, and you'll, you'll be familiar with that, I think. So classical conditioning. Is you pair um an unconditioned stimulus that's the food in the dog and whistle case or dog and bell case from Pavlov, right? So an unconditioned stimulus, which is either something averse or something rewarding in this case, the food is definitely rewarding to a dog, at least my dog likes that. And then a conditioned stimulus which has nothing to do. With the unconditioned stimulus, so it could be a bell, it could be a whistle or whatever it is, so those two things pair together repeatedly then cause the Unconditioned response initially that would be something you can observe, maybe the salivation of the dog into the conditioned response. And that that dog example, I mean, I, I, my, my dog does that. Like my, I, basically, when I do anything, the dog starts salivating. And when I go into the kitchen and start doing something, the dog comes along and it is already salivating. So this is highly conditioned in that case. It is a really strong learning effect. Um, The operant version of that is shown on the right here. It's this mouse that simply learns to pair an action, which is a lever press, which is interesting for a mouse because mice don't do that normally, but they figure it out. They explore the environment by accident. They press a lever, and then an unconditioned stimulus comes along, which is a pellet of food maybe that is dispensed somewhere. So again, doing that a few times for a mouse is enough to make that action. Um, the, the, the, uh, the, the lever press much more likely. So that's the operant version of conditioning. I would, I would actually think that mobile phone use often is operant conditioning because you refresh your screen. That's actually an action and you're waiting for the reward. So you, you, that, that's more a flavour of operant conditioning under these paradigms here. OK, um, We're now gonna abandon these, these older terminologies about opera and classical conditioning and, and, and framing it under a single umbrella. Uh, where we say, where we consider a stimulus and we consider an event. Um, so that would, could be a reward. And we look at this in terms of an a reward expectation, right? The stimulus could also be an action. I mean, it's some event that takes place in the world and then plus a, a, a, a reward later on or punishment later on. And that is paired with an expectation of, of a reward, right? So in. In classical conditioning, we go from stimulus to response. In reinforcement learning, we go from a stimulus to a reward prediction. OK? So what matters here is the predictive aspect that um performing the action or uh uh a particular stimulus has. That, that's what we're looking at. And then, um, we say that what really happens in reinforcement learning. Is that the behaviour reflects that expectation of a reward. So, so behaviour is modified to follow that, that trace that leads you to the reward, right? And so when we now talk about reinforcement learning models, we're we are, we're using stimuli, we're using rewards, and we're using this expected reward, and that's, that's a very important quantity because as we'll see that actually has a neural correlate. We can measure that. Good. Um, so let's look at The a simple and very old model of this process, and this is a really powerful model which is the root of the whole field of reinforcement learning. That's called the Riscola Wagner rule. Um, it was developed to explain classical conditioning paradigms and some of the findings associated with that. So I'll, I'll show these examples later. And it's, it's really extremely simple. So what we're tracking is a single variable. This VT here, uh, T stands for time, the index of time, because that evolves over time. And we, it can be seen as the um associative strength between conditioned stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus um at, at a particular point in time, or it could just be seen as something like the expected reward in reinforcement learning language. So, OK, so every time we encounter um A a stimulus, this, this variable gets updated. Um, so this is here the update rule. Uh, so we're going from T time T minus 1, it might be some kind of random initialization initially. And every time, um, A reward comes in. The current value of that, that Of this variable is compared to the reward quantity that's that's delivered. So we are, we're looking at rewards in terms of the scalar variable. It might be something between 0 and 1, so you can give weak or strong rewards. And the update is proportional to the difference between the actual reward and this predicted reward here at the previous time step, OK. Um, this term here in the bracket is called delta, and this is also called a prediction error. This prediction error is then multiplied with a learning rate and, and, and the variable V is updated by that amount every time um a reward is, is, is experienced. OK? So, um, This delta, the prediction error is very central here, and it's super simple. It's just the difference between what's been experienced and what's been predicted from experience from prior experiences. Um, this rule is sometimes called the delta rule, and you can hopefully see quite easily that you can interpret this delta term as a kind of surprise, right? The bigger that term is, the larger the mismatches between expectation and actual reward, right? So it gives some kind of signal of surprise. So we're updating, we're updating our internal reward estimate by the amount of surprise that we're getting. And so that's, this is how the updates work. If Delta is, is larger than 1 at a particular time step, then the outcome might be the reward is higher than expected. And so in the next time step, this V quantity gets increased. Um, if delta is 0, then the outcome is exactly as expected. The reward is as predicted. There will be no change, and if it's smaller than 0, the delta, then the outcome wasn't quite as good as expected and V is decreased. That's all that's to it. I hope that makes sense. It's a super simple rule, but it turns out it captures conditioning experiments really quite well. So let's see how that works. So here's an example. Um, it's a completely made up example, which is just illustrates how the rule works. So we're starting, um, this estimated V at 0, so no reward expectation whatsoever. And then in a, in a, for, for these 1st 100 time steps here, at every time step, a reward of -1 is presented, OK? And then after 100 times steps, the reward is changed into a plus 1. Just some arbitrary numbers that quantify the reward. OK, so what happens? Well, our estimated V. It goes from initially 0, gradually approaches the value of the reward. Then here at this point this delta term is zero, so the V V V doesn't change anymore. And then as the reward changes, we see that V gradually is uh is, is, is, um. Is moving towards the new reward value of one. On the right here you see the delta term, so that's the difference or this kind of surprise term. And as I've said, this initially is large and then approaches zero as the correct reward is learned and as the reward conditions change again there's there's there's a large delta, large reward prediction error initially, and then that decreases again to 0 as the reward is correctly predicted. So this, this is basically how that rule works now, um. What does it have to do with rewards? A fascinating result is that that That behaviour of the delta term here, this reward prediction error actually turns out to have a neural correlate. So this is data from um very classic experiments on this topic. Um, where monkeys were, um, Trained on a task, so they were basically shown two images and they had to learn to select one of those images and they had to find out which of those two images was associated with the reward. So that was paired beforehand. There, there were certain images that were associated with the reward and others that weren't. So it's a kind of form of operant conditioning going on here and um. What we see here is dopamine neurons in substantia ***, which is a midbrain area, which is kind of an evolutionary, fairly old part of the brain. And In the first row here, we see the response of those neurons before the experiment has even started. So in this case, the monkey is just viewing these images, but there's no information, there's no reward, no nothing. These neurons are just basically just randomly randomly producing activity, but there's no modulation. And what we're seeing here in the next row is when the reward gets introduced. So suddenly, after presentation of the reward with a with a little delay, which is typical for neurons, it all takes a little time to rush through the system. Um, you see a big response of those neurons. So this is an average response over a number of neurons that were recorded in such experiments. And this is closely tied to the presentation of the reward. And then as we're going down here, the rows, we are going through trials, so. The first, this is the first trial. Then we have, um, we, we're starting uh we have repeated presentations of that, um, of, of the rewards or repeated trials where the monkey was starting to experience some rewards. And what we're seeing here is trials where the reward was actually presented and you can see that that response of those neurons gradually decreases and then almost disappears after about 20 trials, 20 successful trials where the reward was collected. So how that that can be interpreted is that those are neurons that are actually signalling this surprise or this reward prediction error. And I'll, I'll have more, a little more data on that, uh, in the, in the next lecture, which, which broadens out that idea a little bit. So that is, um, some good evidence to show that this is the system. Um, that, that, that mediates this, this conditioning response, this conditioned response, and that the system uses something quite similar to the reward prediction error that is, is, um, that's proposed by the Riscola Wagner rule. Now, um. There are a few very salient features of um Of conditioning and um the most. The most famous one is called extinction. And this is a situation where, first, a conditioned response is, is trained, is learned. And then, um, the, the initially unconditioned stimulus is, um, the conditioned stimulus is presented without the outcome later on. OK? So no reward is presented, is given anymore, but the stimulus, so you might. Might imagine first the bell is prepared with the food um and then after some time the bell is rung without any food reward anymore. And as it happens in those cases, the, the conditioned response gradually disappears, right? So you, you sort of unlearn then that conditioned response if um no reward follows. And this is what perfectly predicted by this model. So we see that here in the curve with the um with the black circles. So in the first part up until trial number 100, the conditioning um is, is gradually happening. Um, the reward prediction errors is, is, is growing. So this is V here, um, this is uh W here it should be our V. that's, that's the predicted, um, reward. So, and then in the second part, um, the, uh, reward is no longer presented, right? And that leads to this gradual decay here of the reward, uh, predicted reward. So after these 200 trials here, if the reward was introduced again, then the reward prediction error would be large again and the learning would restart again. Um, this other trait that you see here, these open squares, the squares here, um, they are, uh, a simulation where the reward was randomly presented only in 50% of the trials, only 50% of the time. And so you get a mix of Going closer to the reward value, which is 1 in this case, and then decaying back to 0 again because there are trials where no reward is delivered, right? And so that shows that the expected reward in this setting is, is, is lower than it would be if every every trial was paired with a reward right. And that is something that is also uh can, can be shown in experiments that um these associations are weaker if there's only occasional reward, right? I, I suppose that's kind of the thing that social media companies need to deal with because it's kind of hard to give you rewards all the time on your phone, so you need to sort of balance that a little bit and keep you on the phone for longer. I feel like that there's there's there's there's certainly a parallel there. OK, um, So here's a second phenomenon, and I, I have to say this is a little bit controversial, so some people would say that the phenomenon of blocking uh is not really fully reproducible experimentally as it was initially claimed, but nevertheless, this is something that the model at least predicts. Um, so this is now a situation where we might have, we might use multiple stimuli. So in the example on the slides here, there are two stimuli. Which are paired um with a reward, right? So you can, you can, you can basically write down the Riscola Wagner rule in vector form and then you can have multiple stimuli, you can have multiple rewards and so on and so you can track multiple things at the same time. Now If The setup on the left here is the following that first, um, the first stimulus is used to is only the first stimulus is paired with a reward, so only that first stimulus is shown and a reward is presented all the time. And so then in this case, we, uh, the predicted reward will be at some point will be, will be very close to the actual reward value, OK. So then Second, in the second part, A second reward is introduced, uh, a second stimulus is introduced at the same time and again paired with that reward, but it's together with the 3rd, first, um, with the first stimulus, right? So they're, they're now, they're now, uh, trained together. And it turns out that that in that case, the second stimulus that came later isn't paired anymore with the reward. And the reason for that is that the reward prediction error after this phase one training is already zero, right? The error, this delta term will be zero, so the rule doesn't change, change anymore. It doesn't, it doesn't, it doesn't modify its, its estimates anymore. The reward is fully associated with the first stimulus. But will not be associated ever with the second stimulus because there's no prediction error because that that reward is perfectly predictable. So if you then go and test with the second stimulus, there will be no. No reward expectation measured. Um, as I said, whether that's actually, whether that actually experimentally holds or not is a little bit debated in the literature, but this is definitely a prediction of this, this learning rule here. Um, yeah, so on the right side, you, you can see how you can calculate that for, um, for, uh, two stimuli, um, which are, which are, uh, called V1 and. Oh sorry, um. 2, so I, I, what I tried to write here is the, is, is the vectorized version as a sum, right? OK, so we have, we, we're tracking two reward values and um. And in those cases, because, because, um, because there's only one reward, right? This delta term here determines how much the rule learns. Now, if, if stim if stimulus one already predicts everything, then there will be no further learning. That's basically the message here. OK, um, so that is. What we're going to use and start with next time, oh my God, I'm, I'm already done. Last year, I, I, I had this whole bit in one lecture and I found it too fast, so I split it into two lectures. Now I'm a little bit over time. I have, I have time left. OK, that's good for you maybe. Um, so next time what we're gonna look at is the situation. Where we. Puts an agent into an environment. So this kind of learning that is described by the Riscola-Wagner rule is very passive because the reward is imposed from the outside. The stimuli are imposed in operant conditioning. The agent might or might not do an action, but the only consequence of the action is a reward or no reward. So this is not really acting in an environment. And so what we're what we're gonna do next time is to extend that towards an agent. And that's the brain, right? That's it's within an environment and every action and Uh, or, or an action, the agent will be able to select from a set of actions. Those actions then have an influence on the environment and that in turn then feeds back some information to the agent and that feedback information might will will include some kind of information about, about a reward, right? And the reward is what then triggers um the learning of the action selection procedure. So we can also, so this, this picture here has uh the reward coming back and it also gives potentially information about the current state that the agent is. So if you think about a grid world agent that moves around in an in an environment, there will be information about where it is, maybe some visual information and then maybe at some location you might have uh uh might be able to pick up a reward, right? And and so both of that goes back into the agent. And together that drives learning. Um So The, the agent then will have. An explicit goal or a set of explicit goals, um, and they will be implemented through rewards or punishments, OK? And um the idea is that the agent seeks rewards, it avoids the punishments, and it learns that through a principle which is essentially an extension of Riscola Wagner. Um, and what such agents can do is they can basically explore the environment and start and iteratively learn how to act in the environment to, to, uh, Um, to maximise reward and avo avoid punishment. So I'm, I'm sort of putting that here as a little bit as a, as a preparation for the next time. I think next time I'm, I will have to still. Watch out not to overrun. Um. So yeah, so, um, that's all I have. I'll, in the summary here. So the key, key take home from this one is this reward prediction error that the Riscola-Wagner rule, uh, uh, models that, that is the basis for, um, how reinforcement learning works and the simple model predicts these, these basic findings around classical and operant conditioning. Um, yeah, we have time for questions if you have any. Feel free to. Ask if you Like to know anything. Um, is, is everybody OK with the equations? I'm happy to. Spend more time on that if, if you're, if you're unsure. OK. All right. OK. Good. So, so I'll stop here. So sorry for, for, sorry for uh uh misjudging the time this will take, um. I'll see you again on Thursday.
