SPEAKER 0
OK, hello. Good afternoon. Um, so today we're gonna continue on reinforcement learning and we're, we're getting properly into it this time. So on Tuesday, I was trying, as I mentioned, I gave this whole thing as a single lecture in previous years, and that was, that was too much for one lecture. So I tried to split it up in a sensible way. Next year, I'll have it perfect, but last, on, on Tuesday, that lecture, I had, I had a bit too little, so as a, as a result, we have more to do today. But I wanted to set the scene by talking about classical conditioning because that's where, that's the root of reinforcement learning and the models that we have now, they, they really originate from the, the, the perspective that classical conditioning gave us initially. And So today we're gonna take, we're gonna start off again with the classic conditioning model, and then we will gradually change that model and add a few bells and whistles to it. And that, as we will see, will allow us to build um a model that can learn essentially how to act in fairly complicated worlds. And I, I'll show you some, some examples of that uh at the end. Um, it's, it's really quite impressive. I mean, you've, you've, you might have heard about things like AlphaZero, AlphaGo. So those are reinforcement learning systems that um can deal with really complicated things like the game of Go. So, um, OK, I'll start with this idea of credit assignment problem. So I'll tell you what that is. We, we start by just introducing it and thinking about this scholar Wagner rule again. So you all remember from Tuesday that this is a rule which can pretty well describe key aspects of classical conditioning, and this is done by pairing a stimulus with a reward. And all that rule does is it basically over time through repeated pairings learns. The association between the stimulus and reward by what we say, predicting that reward. So it, it is based on a quantity. Which is called the prediction error. So that's the difference between the predicted reward and the actual reward that's delivered. That quantity, that prediction error quantity called delta, uh, usually the, the goal of the learning rule is to bring that to zero to be perfectly predictable about what's gonna happen, right? So that's in conditioning. That there's no time in this. There's there's just multiple presentations of the same pairing basically, and the rule describes how that association over time is learned, um, and how it disappears again if that association is no longer present and so on. So we, we talked about extinction and so on. OK. So, that's, um, that, that, the key thing here is this delta rule because we're gonna take that and make some modifications uh as we go along. So now here's, here's an example. Of a conditioning paradigm which is relevant to us now, um, it's called second order conditioning and it's well established that basically you can, um, you can after a conditioning paradigm you can introduce a new stimulus, a new condition stimulus, and generalise the conditioning to that new conditioned stimulus and that works without a reward. So I'll explain how that works. So, um, here on the left, we see an experiment that goes in 3 stages. So first of all, um, you got, you have, I don't have that. Does anyone have that, an electric can opener. Anyway, it makes a noise, right? Um, you use that to open the food can for the cat, um, and then food is, food is available. And the cat quickly figures out that that noise predicts food. So if it's a hungry cat, start salivate or react in some way, come along and expect food, expect the reward. So that's the condition stimulus paired with the reward. So what you then can do is you can start um what what maybe happens is that just before you, you would use the can opener, you open the cupboard to get the food out. So what you're actually doing here is you're pairing the sound of the. The, um, the door together with the can opener. But in this case, there's no reward presented because you weren't opening cat food, you were opening your can of ravioli for dinner or whatever. So in this case, no reward is given. The cat will still respond with salivation because it's learned the association between the can opener and food. So, um, So the reward, the response is, is still measurable. Now, what, however, that happens is that um. Over time, after a couple of times of this happening and before extinction happens of the, the, the can opener, um, the, um, squeaky cup uh cupboard door will also start, uh, start, start triggering that reward expectation cat will start to salivate. I don't actually know if cats are salivating. This is an image from Wikipedia. I would have put the dog there anyway. Um, where is that one? It's actually a dog. Never mind. Um, OK, so what that means is you can, you can, as I said, you can transfer over, or you can, what I call generalise, you can, you can, uh You can um A conditioned response can be transferred over to other stimuli as well if they're paired with a conditioned stimuli. So you can, you can make a second condition stimulus by just presenting it together with the first condition stimulus. It doesn't need reward, right? So the question is, can the Riscola Wagner rule explain this? Who votes no? Uh, nobody? Yes? What do you think? No. Can it not explain it? That's. Yeah, Do Do you have an idea why it can

SPEAKER 1
the Wagner had blocking so, so that if you had like two conditions with one outcome like it wouldn't.

SPEAKER 0
Yeah That's a good, yeah, good thought exactly. So, um, you've kind of predicted everything there is to predict already because the reward is fully predicted by the um electric can opener. So you'd kind of say that uh you cannot introduce a new condition stimulus um because everything is predictable, right? So that would be blocking it's, it's tiny bit different here because actually here um no reward is given. In the second case, uh, during the pairing, right? And that rule only learns when there's a reward presented, right? If there's no reward, um. Then, um, the, well, there would be no positive update for this one here in the first place. Let's assume the can opener is not fully learned. You could start learning those two together, but that only works if there's a reward in the first place. And actually what this is pointing out here is that uh because there's no reward, there's now, um, when the can opener is shown. Without a reward, you would basically get extinction, right? So the, the association would disappear and the squeaky door would never be paired with, um, with, uh, with the reward in the first place. So Um So I'm, I'm showing this because this is one instance of um a problem which is generally called the credit assignment problem. Um, so, In this case here, well, generally, the question is, you experience a lot of things throughout the day and You have to decide or you have to know which of the events are actually associated with the reward, right? And added problem, uh, for, for conditioning in general, which the scholar Wagner rule doesn't quite address is that there might be a time delay between the condition stimulus and the reward, um, so that basically assumes that they're presented together, OK, so none of this. Can be captured with the Riscola Wagner rule and by extension, a second rewards or a second condition stimulus that's clearly paired because it's related to the first one will not be learned. So this would be a credit assignment in terms of generalisation. So you learn more about the world, you know the doors associated with food because that precedes the can opener, right? So that's an instance of credit assignment. So credit assignment is, is the question which Conditions stimuli are, are relevant for a reward and which ones are not, right? If you just did that by temporal proximity, you would learn potentially wrong associations and because I mean, I, I presented conditioning a little bit as a game and with social media and so on, but conditioning is actually something that's quite useful because that's uh potentially uh. Uh, Important information for an animal that it wants to quickly learn, uh, I think for aversive stimuli in particular you want to quickly learn to avoid. By the way, perfect example, personal experience, the worst, the worst conditioning I'm aware of is anything to do with food poisoning because you might feel sick and you inevitably, I, I will inevitably. Uh, conclude that what I've just eaten has made me sick, and I, I will dislike whatever it was, even if it was my favourite thing that I've eaten before. So mushrooms are really not a thing for me anymore because I had that experience once. That's conditioning, right? So you, you avoid the negative, uh, consequence. So, OK, so. And what we're looking at now, because it's quite, it's, it's um It's, it's relevant for, it's, it's a key, it's a key ingredient. The solution to this is a key ingredient of reinforcement learning is this temporal credit assignment problem. So which past. Um stimulus, or here it says action was actually responsible for a positive outcome. And so that's, again, I showed this at the end on, on Tuesday, is that we're, we're, we're looking at an agent that's embedded in a world. It gets information from the world about the current state it is, right? So that's just your visual information, you know, you're in a lecture theatre and it might also get these, these cues, rewards, punishments which tell it um. Uh, what to avoid and where to go to, right? So. So, because the rewards and, and punishments might be delayed, there's a multitude of stimuli questions, what is the correct association to form? And um so what we're looking at now is an extension of Riscola Wagner essentially. Which solves this, um, this problem that rewards might show up with a certain delay and that delay might not necessarily be predictable, right? So you don't know when the reward is coming, but you still wanna make sure that that association is learned, learned because I, it took me half an hour to get sick after eating the, the bad mushrooms. So, um. OK, so this is quite busy. Believe me, that's actually quite simple. Um, I'm not going, there's a lot of fun math, by the way, you can do with these routes because they're so easy. They're all linear and so on. I'm not going through that. I'm, I'm, what I'm hoping to be able to give you a conceptual idea of what these things, what these learning routes do, OK? So to set this problem up we now um have a stimulus that we call a U. And we can say that's maybe either 0, which is no stimulus, or 1 stimulus present. We have the reward R as before and then we have an expected reward V. um, so that's like wescola Wagner rule. But now we're, we're looking at what we call a trial. So let's think about like, um, a psychologist doing experiments with a rat. Uh, we repeat the same experimental condition multiple times. We show the rat something and then we give it some food. And each time we do that we call that a trial and we repeat it many times and each trial now has a duration uh capital T, so it's, I don't know, 2 seconds long, whatever, OK? So now you can, you can see how the, the, the stimulus is presented and some time elapses and then the rat discovers the reward or it's, it, it, it pushes the lever, waits a little bit, and then some food comes out of somewhere, you know, that's the, that's the delay we're looking at here. So we can compute now something um we want to compute the expected reward and what that actually is, is written down here as an equation. So this is an average over um so we want to compute the, the, the expected reward at time point T and the expected reward is everything that's coming in the future. So that's basically the sum overall future rewards that we might get. And that whole thing is average, so the conditions are always the same. It's, it's always the same experiment repeated over many trials, right? So that's what we wanna know at every point in time, right? Um, so before the stimulus is shown, for instance, we, we don't expect any reward. As soon as stimulus comes on, we would like that. So if it comes on at time T equals 10 or something, right? Then we want this V to tell us, oh there's a reward coming in. The future sometime. Um, that's what we want to learn. So we can, we, we have to go to the single trial, single stimulus um level for that and the equation down here tells us how to do that. So, um, basically, um, we have to look at the past, uh, so at time T, let's say 10 milliseconds, 10 seconds in or something like that, we go over all previous time steps up to time T. And we first look if there was a stimulus at any of these time points. Remember, stimulus here is just 0 or 1, so we look at the time. Um, so only the time where the stimulus was turned on is relevant, and then we introduce a quantity W. Which is now our sort of proportional to our predicted reward at that time. So that's how we're kind of. Sees that how we unpack that problem. So what we're doing now is here, we want, we would like to learn this quantity W of tau, where tau is any time point within a trial, um, so that it gives us the right prediction at the right time about a future event, right? Um, and that is paired here with the stimulus, uh, association. So, so it, it basically. This one will tell us something as soon as a relevant stimulus is, is, is present. So, it can also be interpreted as a kind of weight of a stimulus um that um that happened some time ago and that tells us about what the reward expectation is. So, we, we now want to learn that weight. And so I'm, I'm, I put the equation down here again, and it turns out the update rule is really quite easy. You can actually derive it. It's a, it's a kind of interesting exercise to do in the book that I've referenced, uh, on the course website. You can see the full derivation of that. I'll, I'll just tell you how it works. So here's the update rule. We're updating this W. By, um, a, uh, first by, um, Um, at, so we, we're doubling, we're, we're updating each, each W at each time delay tau because we, we wanna span the whole trial, right? And we're, we're, we're doing, we're, we're multiplying the update by the stimulus, so we, we wanna update that at the time point where the stimulus has happened. And then we have a Delta rule again. So this is the, the, this, this is again a reward prediction error like in the Riscola Wagner rule. It's exactly the same thing. It's a mismatch between what's been observed and what's been predicted. And the world world prediction error looks almost the same as in Riscola Wagner except that it now contains this. Um, predicted reward at the next time step. And what it actually does is it, OK, so I think I've got that here, yeah. So what this does is it. Um, looks at, um, the difference in reward prediction between the current and the next time point. So the update. is now um can go basically there's there's two ways the reward prediction can be updated in either a positive or negative way. Let's talk about the positive way. One is that a reward is given at point time, at, at time point T. So if the rollout happens that goes up because it's, it's an additive, it's additive in this equation here, right? Um, but you can also get an update if an increase in the predicted reward, if the predicted reward in one time step ahead is higher than the current update, uh, the current estimate. So, What it kind of means is that if you, if, if this says there is a reward coming in the future, and I'm not quite predicting that, I'm increasing my prediction a little bit. So I'm going more towards predicting that reward. Um, the, the opposite is true for the, you get negative update for exactly the opposite case. So that's kind of a bit confusing, but it becomes hopefully, hopefully super clear when you look at what happens. So, Here's a Here's an illustration of, of a simulation of this rule where at time 0.100. Seconds or whenever, um, a stimulus was given stim so you were set to 1 at that point in time. And at time point, around time 0.200 a reward was given. And actually, um, so the reward is shown here. This is not just at a single time point, but it, it, it, it, it is given over a little time interval, basically, OK? So, on the Y axis here, We see the prediction error. And on this, oh sorry, this is the Y axis. On the, along the Y-axis we see trials from early trials to late trials. So many, many repeated presentations and on, on, on the Z axis, I guess, uh, we have the uh prediction error, X Y Z, yeah. We have the prediction error for each trial and at each time point. Now. This one here hopefully makes sense if we look at the first trial around time 200. Because the model knows nothing, it has never seen a reward, and so we get a positive prediction error because suddenly a reward is coming along and that is not predicted, so the prediction error is positive and as a result this W of 200. 200 times step will increase, so it will predict a reward there because it's, it's happened, OK. Now, if we are going across trials, you can see how that prediction error moves slowly, gradually to earlier time points in the trial. And that happens because we're actually looking at this temporal difference here and this is what gives the rule its name. It's the temporal difference rule. So now, there's been a reward predicted in the future, one time step ahead, right? And that leads to a prediction error a little bit earlier. So the, the sort of reward prediction is moved backwards in time. All the way to the point where the stimulus was given. Um And Because it's, it's paired with the stimulus, it cannot be before, it cannot move anywhere before the stimulus, OK, because we've got, we're multiplying this here with the, with the stimulus. So before the stimulus there, there will be no update. So you, you can see here what happens from before and after. So before is, is the first, that's the first trial, and that's after learning. So our stimulus U is given always at time. 100. The reward is always given at time. 200 here. Now this is our value prediction. It's completely flat at the start and then at the end. The reward prediction is constant, is a constant value, um, which goes all the way to when the reward is, is, is actually delivered. Um, this is the temporal prediction error. So this is uh 0 in the beginning because nothing has been learned and now this just happens from the time step before the stimulus to the time step but it isn't propagated any further because that's where stimulus comes and down here we see the reward prediction error so it's, it's, it's happens around the reward presentation time in the beginning. And then it um happens at the time point when the reward is, uh, when the stimulus is presented because in this setting, the stimulus, the presentation of the stimulus is not predictable. It's, there's nothing to predict that, so it kind of appears to come at a random time. So when the stimulus comes on, um, the, the, uh, uh, the temporal difference error is non-zero, it's positive because suddenly there is a, there's something happening in the future. So that's how temporal difference learning, TD learning works. It's um You, if you, if you do something to do with robotics in the future, you'll come across that in much more detail because it's really the foundation for any reinforcement learning. I, I guess when you guys are in year 4, maybe, who knows what AI is doing then, whether that's still, it's moving so fast at the moment, but I'm, I'm, I'm, I've, I've decided a couple of years to put that in because it's, it's really central not just in, in, in sort of, uh. Some areas of cognitive science, but, uh, in, in AI machine learning, it's, it's, it's a, it's a key, key methodology to know about. Um, so, um, this behaviour here, which is the reward prediction error and how it moves over time. Can actually be found in recordings again. So, uh, here we are looking at neurons in the ventral tegmental area. Is that right? Yeah, not written it down, but VTA, yeah. So, um, another part of the midbrain, again, one of these evolutionary old parts of the brain. And it turns out that these neurons essentially signal the reward prediction error. So here we have a reward presented for the first time and these neurons fire. And then after a number of trials of learning this association, suddenly, um, those neurons fire at the point when the conditioned stimulus is presented and no longer at the time point when the reward is presented. And that's exactly the behaviour that we're, we're seeing here when we look at the delta difference. Um, there's a bit more, there's a bit more happening here because um this is a, this is a set of trials where the after training where the reward was emitted, so the condition stimulus still produces this, this response in those neurons, but now the lack of the reward causes the opposite set response. So there's a prediction error in the opposite direction there as well because the reward that was predicted, um, is, is, is no longer present. So it can do it in. In in both ways, and that would be. That would be an expected behaviour also for the TD learning route. So, the, um, so this was found, um, after, uh, so, so those learning routes were, were, were proposed before those results were presented. So I think it's often forgotten, but I think it's a nice, it's a nice example of where computational studies have actually pre predicted something, have made a pretty strong prediction about how uh How brain processes function and confirmed, at least to some extent on a, on a sort of basic level, they were confirmed later on by experiments. OK, uh, hm, so now we have to do a few more steps and I'll glance over that. So I'm trying to give you the sort of key things to understand what's going on in reinforcement learning without diving into the details too much. So, mm. What we're now doing is we're gonna leave this kind of conditioning paradigm. So now we know how we can bridge a time interval between a reward and a stimulus, OK? But now we want to look at more general behaviour, so maybe we wanna look at what actions, in effect actions have because I showed you that on the previous slide there were actions involved with the environment. And I wanna talk more generally, not about a stimulus, a conditioned stimulus, but I wanna talk about a state in general, and the state is just. Everything that an agent or we are in at any point in time, OK? I'm in the lecture theatre talking. That's my state right now. So, I can go into a different state later, I go, go to the train station, sit on the train, that's another state, and so on. So, that's what we're meaning by state. It's everything that, that's, that's, that's sensory world is basically telling us. And we're gonna talk about um transitions between states. So what actions do is they bring us from one state to the uh to the next state, right? I walk over to the train station, that's a state change that I'm doing that. So we wanna first now learn or find a way to learn how useful or useless certain states are, OK? So we're moving to this description where we're no longer talking about um. Um, so if we go back. Here we have value, uh, or the, the predicted reward at particular points in time within a trial and we abandon that and we predict, we're trying to predict the value of discrete states and we are, we might be, this might be a whole set of states that we can move through by choosing certain actions. Um, so, we can reformulate the temporal difference rule just in terms of states, so it's the same thing and that's happening here. Um Oh, I didn't mention that. Uh, this is an interesting, OK, it's not, not included here, so I've started including it here. So the, the equation is identical to the previous TD learning rule that I showed you, except we have now uh this, this factor gamma here. That is uh that that discount a dis uh that is called a discount factor. And it's used, it's between 0, well, it's larger than 00, and can can go up to 1. And that controls how much attention we pay to future rewards. As opposed to immediate rewards, right? So that's a kind of balancing, um, we, we might, yeah, I have it, I think somewhere chocolate tomorrow or chocolate now. What's, what's kind of, what, what do we prefer that you can, you can calibrate with that factor, so it's called a discount factor. OK, so now updates work in the exactly the same way we calculate that prediction error and then we update um based on. The Difference between the current next state and any reward that we might have gotten in, in, in a particular state. OK, so that's what we're using to update and so you might have this collection of many states, home, lecture theatre, train, whatever, shop. And each of these now has um a, a reward prediction associated with it. Uh, so, I guess certain things might be. More desirable than others, and so that gives us a map of where we get the most reward. It doesn't tell us yet about action, and that's the last thing to add here. And this is called cue learning. So What we would like now, what we would, would, would like to do is to have a way to formalise how moving between states helps us to predict future actions that we could do to, to maximise our reward, either future reward or maybe immediate reward, whatever it is. And, and this problem is solved in a very generic way by an equation called the Bellman equation. So, what you, this is a recursive equation that you can run, you, you basically run through every state. At every state you pick the um action that brings you into a uh a state with a higher predicted reward and you do that again and again and that kind of gives you a complete map of the predicted rewards for all possible states that are available to you um. You you always choose the action that brings you into a higher rewarding state and that way, you sort of traverse the whole, the whole system of all possible states, um, and you build up, you, you, when, when you've done that sufficiently and for a large state space where you have many options to go and choose from, that takes a whole time because a long time because you have to traverse through all states, but eventually it will converge to the correct prediction. Uh, predictive rewards that you have in every state and you can always make the choice of this action so you can do an argmax here if you wanted to and that tells you what your preferred action is, right? So it would tell you, um, I don't know what your, your status lecture theatre. Think about an action that brings you to more reward, I think you can. Yeah, stay here probably. OK, um, good, so we're going from a current to a next state. Um, This thing, the Bellman equation, can be used to build that map and also to get you an optimal policy, and a policy is basically the set of actions that bring you the maximum reward, right? So. This, you can prove that that works, that, that's just the, the problem with the Bellman equation is that it's computationally quite expensive because you need to spend a lot of time moving through states to build up that map because uh it depends a bit on the learning rate, but it's a, it's a relatively slow process. You, you need, you need to be in each state thousands of times if you have a large system of states to, to really learn that. Um Now, and that's the final kind of method that we're introducing here which is more efficient is Q learning. Where um we introduce a tiny difference to this state-only description. What we're learning in this case is not just the value of state for the best action and all these policies that we could pull out of that, but we're basically learning the expected reward of a pair of state and action. So now you have a kind of almost like a lookup table for every state. You have a number of actions that you can choose from. And each of those pairs has a predicted reward um available to you. Each is local because um it only tells you how much you gain if you go to the next state. So what happens if you go out of the lecture theatre down outside that, that might not be great because it's cold, so no reward, right? But then maybe going further and to the pub that that has a high reward, so maybe that balances the low immediate reward and so on. So that's the kind of. That's the kind of way to think about it. It's called because. And when you move through such a, such a kind of system. You, what, what you're doing only depends on the current state. So your, your choice, uh, if you choose the best possible state action pair, um, that only depends on the current state, and that's called, uh, Makovvian system, uh, if, if you know that. So it's. Why am I saying that? Because mathematically, that's uh a pretty simple way to think about, about, um, such a problem. And got an illustration here of what that means. So, let's assume we have uh an agent that only lives in 3 states. And here, a transition. So here we are, we have now the option from each state to go into any, any of, of two other states. There's no staying in one state in this one. So there are two actions for each state which correspond to moving to one of the other states. And each state action pair has a reward associated with it or punishment which is shown given here by these numbers. So this transition has state action transition has a high reward. That's a nice state to go to. You get lots of reward going from this state over to this state has -5, so that's a bad punishment. You would never like to do that. So So down here we have at the bottom, we see those Q values, so the predicted uh reward that each state action pair has. And um this tells us just here that tells us the amount of rewards for each transition out of every state. And so, so 11 trajectory uh that we can take here, so I picked this one out because that's the sort of informative one is in state two, if we're there. We might decide, oh, it's great to go to state one because we get a little reward here, OK? So we can do that. But then leaving state one always incurs a penalty. We either pay -1 penalty, which gives us a net reward of 0, or we get a very large penalty here which gives us a net punishment essentially, right? Now, we can also go out of state 2 through a little punishment into state 3. So, maybe you have to leave the house, uh, but it's cold outside, so you get, you get a bit of negative reward for that. But from stage 3 you can easily go into state 1, and that transition has a high value now. Um, and so as a result, um, and that's the Q value, so that, that's why this future expected reward of going to the right here is higher than going to the left, even though the immediate consequence is that you get punished a little bit, right? So that's how Q learning works. That's the information that these Q values contain. So, if you've kind of got, maybe think about a system now where you have 1000, 10,000, 100,000 states, if you've mapped them all out well, Then you can make informed decisions about your future reward at any point in, in this, in this large state space, OK? So that's, that's how essentially reinforcement learning works. There's a bit more to it. Some of it is. Bells and whistles, whistles around that, but um I mean. I'll come to that again later, but this sounds nice in theory, but it's quite hard in practise because if we're looking at reinforcement learning. P, uh, uh, tasks which are more realistic, you get to these very large state spaces, OK? So we have worked on reinforcement learning, modelling for navigation. We wanted to look at certain ideas of how, uh, rodents do navigation in certain navigation tasks, and so we looked at that using reinforcement learning agents and it turns out they are incredibly data inefficient. So a rat or a mouse might learn a task in. 100 trials or a bit more. A reinforcement learning agent needs 10,000 trials to learn the same thing. So a big difference and half of these models will probably never learn anything because they won't converge because the variability is so high. So reinforcement learning is computationally quite expensive, but when it works, it's pretty good. That's what I would say. So, um, very briefly just to mention that, uh, I've shown you two pieces of data on Tuesday we looked at, um. Uh, what did we look at? The reward prediction, oh, hang on. So that look We looked at the prediction errors, OK, and the value, yeah, yeah, so prediction error in Roscola Wagner last time and this time we looked at um. At, uh, the, um, predicted predicted future value we, we actually looked at the prediction error this time as well because we looked at the shifting, never mind. So there are neurons in these different parts, mostly midbrain, which can be related to different components of this computation that you need to do for reinforcement learning. So, um, there's the TD signal, um. There's this part for action selection which I didn't really go into how it's done. There's the reward prediction, so the TD signal is the prediction error. That's the reward prediction that is computed. And then the whole sort of world knowledge is in the cortex. So we, we can, we can, to some extent, we can separate out different parts of the brain that seem to be doing different computations uh related to, to reinforcement learning. So, it seems to be something that is quite tightly embedded in the brain because it's, it's kind of functionally segregated into different components. And as I said, it's, it's these evolutionary old parts of the brain. So, this is, this is something that's very, very uh uniform across. Or vertebrates and so on and exists for a long time. All right, um, Just quickly now, something, so I don't know if you're aware of these things, but they're all quite recent developments, um. So, we go back. Uh, in 2010, deep learning, nobody talked about it. It wasn't, uh, neural networks were basically and sort of slightly exotic thing. That um people like we computational neuroscientists work with. Nobody in machine learning really thought that was, that was interesting, but then there was a big change because these vision models came uh out which were very good in classifying images, finding things in images and so on. So, that was the first kind of part of that revolution. And then actually, based on that, There were some, uh, so, so there was this idea that paired together these learning capabilities with reinforcement learning could actually produce systems that could could produce intelligent behaviour to some extent. And one of the first big successes in this was That's all work done by uh Google, now Google, but back then it was a startup called DeepMind. They're now absorbed into Google. Uh, you might have heard about them. Demis Hassabis is, is, is, is the founder of this, this company. Uh, he's actually by training, uh, more or less a computational neuroscientist. He did a PhD at UCL in, in neuroimaging and computational neuroscience. Um, So Big breakthrough was this um Was work from DeepMind demonstrating that It's possible to train. Reinforcement learning systems by just giving them the pixel data from video games. So this is the old Atari video games. There's a whole collection of games with all sorts of things, Pac-Man-like things, variety of games with different, different goals, and, uh, but, but you always had a, have a display with a score somewhere on the screen and the task. Um, the, the score was the, the, the value that or the reward that needs to be maximised and with that, basically with that objective, with that reinforcement learning objective, these models initially they do random actions, but then they start playing systematically because they discover ways of increasing that score and they become expert players in these games without being given any information about what that game is about, right? And then um. A really big step was um AlphaGo, which uh is uh um a reinforcement and training, uh uh um. Or, or it's actually the proper version of it is AlphaZero, which was a successor of that, a model that was, is trained to play the game of Go, who knows Go? To few of you. The the Yeah, OK, so you, you guys play good, uh, it's the, the tricky problem in go is that the space state space is astronomically high. You have a large board, many, many, many, um, ways to, to place the, the black and white stones that make up the game. You have to conquer territory basically on the board. That's the goal. And the state space is is by magnitudes, orders of magnitudes higher than in chess. So chess is a fairly easy game in comparison to go just from the point of view of state spaces. I'm not saying chess is easy. Both games have a lot to do, I think, with good intuition and so on. But from a computational perspective, from sort of getting a computer to play games, Go is the hardest, is one of the hardest ones to think about. And so DeepMind managed to build a system that was able to beat a world champion in Go. That's the least of all match, which was in 2016. And then, um, so a lot has followed up from that, which shows that reinforcement learning is, is, is a powerful tool. The most recent example, I think you've heard about it in the large language model lecture, right? That you basically can fine tune or get large language models to produce sensible output by using some reinforcement learning, where you basically uh train them on You, you, you don't give them any instructions. It's not a supervised way of learning. You just tell them, is this right or wrong, right? They, they want to maximise reward by being correct as many times as possible. So that's, that's a reinforcement learning procedure behind that. And in fact, I, I think, I mean, I, I did play with the very early large language models and without that, they just produced gibberish. You, you, you really need that step to get them to, to say anything reasonable. Um, OK, I mean, I've got, you can, you can look at that, um, at the time, so this is AlphaZero in 2017, it's a comparison, um. Um, it, it, it, OK, so, so, so the way this model was trained, which is interesting, is it plays, plays against itself and the objective is to win. OK. So it gets a reward when it wins. That's the, that's how it was set up. And this seems small by now, but it was 2017, it was insane, like 64 GPU. Who could afford that, right? I mean, we've got a lot more here now. But anyway, 19 CPU servers. So that was a setup that cost back then 25 million. That's how they trained it. It's, uh, this is, this is, I don't know, soon people will have that in their living room if they. Yeah, so, so, um. The main What's pretty cool about this is that this model didn't know about the rules, so it only chooses actions that were allowed according to the game rules, but it wasn't given any other information. And so it figured everything out, but it needed a fair amount of training time, so 4.95 million games it needed to play to get to that top performance. So, that's a, I mean, no human can even. You know, remotely get to that. We are somehow learning not by reinforcement learning alone because we cannot play these, these, these 5 million games, right? We have, I think, a lot smarter learning than reinforcement learning, and I think that's a big limitation with reinforcement learning. It's a really quite simplistic way of learning and maybe not something that really can produce highly intelligent behaviour unless you burn through a lot of compute compensation. So this is Museo, which was a successor which could learn. Everything including the rules, so. This could learn Go Atari video games. It could learn chess and so on, and um the objective was to win. And it It, um, it wasn't given the rules, so it figured the rules out by itself, basically. Um, and the, the innovation here was that there's not just the board that it looks at, but it has some internal latent model that it builds of the game. So that's a, a little bit more towards intelligence, I suppose. I mean, um, I've written here, so training, lots of training uh on TPUs. These are tensor, um, uh. Tensor product units, no, tensor processing units, sorry, so it's similar to GPUs but basically tailored chip, the chips that are optimised for neural networks. So, um, pretty, yeah, uh, impressive performance, essentially superhuman and all of these things, but of course, that model will not be able to do anything else, right? So, there's no intelligent behaviour because it cannot generalise outside. You can show it another video game, it will learn that. Um, it can do that, but it cannot make use of that knowledge in any way, so it's sort of outside that training domain, big limitation. And then, as I mentioned before, so that's my personal take on RL is reinforcement learning is. What he says here, um. If you, yeah, this is literally our experience. Does reinforcement learning work? Uh, the safe answer is, um. About, uh, usually not because you mostly will be correct because if you start training a model on something that's a little more complicated, the chances that that model will just not learn anything are pretty high, right? And what people are spending their time with is to optimising around hyperparametters. It goes all the way to choosing the right random, random seed for your training to get a model to train properly. So, it's, it's a very brittle form of learning. I recommend that website here that I've linked up. It's fun. Um, it has a collection of reinforcement learning gone wrong because the other thing that reinforcement learning algorithms do is they find creative ways uh to, to do shortcuts too. So there's, there's one example of a video game where you get rewarded for driving a boat as fast as possible. And that game learned just to go in circles, collide with everything, didn't matter. The score was max that, that was a good way of maximising the score much better than trying to, to uh explore the world and, and so on a normal game I would do. So it finds, it finds kind of shortcuts which are sometimes funny and sometimes quite interesting, but. Shortcuts are a problem because shortcuts can never lead to generalisation. So if you want to have a trainer system that's a bit more generally capable, then shortcut learning is exactly the wrong way because shortcuts never generalise to new settings. And what people are trying to do now and have been trying for a while is to use that in robotics because in robotics, space spaces are huge if you think about control and, and, and sort of things that you can do, uh, even with a relatively simple robot. Um, yeah, and I guess that's what's happening. So we'll see, we'll see where this is going. Um, maybe when your 4th year, people will go like reinforcement learning is old and no longer interesting. I don't know. Any questions? Well, we can We can do, uh, I, I guess we'll have some time for questions tomorrow. So tomorrow, by the way, amongst other things, we'll give you some information about the exam. Um, I can tell you already that we will do a revision session about a week before the exam. So, if any questions come up until then, um, then we'll, we'll, we'll spend like, easily spend 2 hours or something on a revision session and answer your question. Right. OK, see you tomorrow.
