SPEAKER 0
No. I All right, good afternoon.

SPEAKER 1
What a nice and rainy day. So. Um, we'll, we'll straight continue where we finished off last week, just, uh, uh, last. What am I talking? Last, last session on Tuesday, Thursday today. So last on Tuesday, I told you about the retina and receptive fields and just as a quick reminder. We're finding that cells have this kind of spatial sensitivity profile that you can see here which I call difference of Gaussians receptive field or Mexican hat receptive field. And we saw how this can be used to enhance contrasts in images. Um, how it gives rise to certain illusions and here, I was pointing out the fact that the cells entity or the, the resolution across the retina differs. So we have high resolution in the central part um that we use for fixation and much lower resolution in the periphery. And this in turn gives rise to, to this illusion that you see here, the Hamman grid illusion, where you see these darker uh areas at the intersection between those squares. And I got myself confused on how to explain that with receptive fields. So I'm Hopefully going to do it now. So I said to you, this on the top here, this represents the fovea where we have high resolution, where we don't experience the the the illusion. And this area down here represents the periphery where we can see these darker areas between the squares. And so what happens here is that that If you imagine a receptive field that looks at the crossing, the cross here between those squares, then we get a relatively large amount of inhibition from the surround, and so its response gets suppressed more than compared to a cell which sits between that that sits between these boxes like this one here. So here we have less stimulation of the surround. The surrounds less active and therefore it suppresses the response of the cell less. And as a result, this will appear brighter than this one because here we have more suppression and that's basically the effect that we experience when we see these areas between the squares in in the intersections when we see that as something slightly darker. Um, it was still working. Good. OK, so I didn't manage that last time, so I hope that makes sense as a, as a, so, so the idea is that we have. Cells in our visual system and that's an idea that you can apply more broadly that have certain sensitivities, certain sensitivity profile, and there are reasons for this, like for instance, mainly encoding changes and not um not uh parts of the stimulus where nothing changes and that in turn leads also to some of these illusory percepts because of the way the. The essentially of the way the sensory information gets filtered by those receptive fields. So I want to briefly explain to you in a sort of conceptual way how this is realised and and So I wanna introduce for this the concept of lateral inhibition. So this is a concept which comes up, which comes from neural circuit studies. So here we're, we're looking at how different neurons are connected to each other and how they interact and how that leads to the computation. So, uh, to, to the, to the observed effects. So here we're actually looking at the implementation of this in, in a, in a sort of neural level, whereas this one here. This is kind of the algorithmic form of of of a receptive field, right? This is, this doesn't say much about how it's implemented in in in practise so you can implement this in a computer by writing down the equation or here we have an implementation through neurons and that's very simple. So imagine down here we have this ganglion cell, those are the cells which are sending the information out to the brain. A ganglion cell happens to integrate. Information across um um a local area we, we saw this last time so each cell is only responsive to a particular location in the visual field so it collects the information from maybe a bunch of photoreceptors which uh which correspond to that location in the visual field. Now a centres around receptive field just works in a way that you have an. And a sort of excitatory input, an exciting input. So if that's an on cell from one photoreceptor, the one in the centre here, and that's the centre of the receptive field. So if light shines on that photoreceptor, it'll it'll cause the ganglion cell to spike. And then we have more photoreceptors here on the sides, and those photoreceptors are not directly feeding into that ganglion cell, but they're feeding via a so-called interneuron. So that's a neuron which converts that excitation into inhibition, right? And then the ganglion cell takes the sum of those signals together and transmits that on. And I hope you, you can easily see how you can get, if you extend that to do it to the space, you have a centre photoreceptor and you have a ring. Around it and that ring is inhibitory in that way you can construct these receptive fields. So that's like how to build a circuit that that gives that a rise to that function and that's roughly how it works in the in the real retina. So that's a slightly simplified picture, but just to give you the idea. Name for this is lateral inhibition because you might remember lateral means from the side. So this, this is inhibition that's coming from the side. Um, OK, um, brief word about receptive fields more generally. So we've now, we now know what a receptive field is in vision. It's the area in the visual space that um uh a, a cell is sensitive to, but actually, um, the, the idea didn't come from vision, it comes from um uh the somatosensory system and over 100 years ago, this was defined as the area. Um, on the body surface that would cause a response in, in a cell in the somatosensory system. So, similarly to the visual field, we can find cells in the somatosensory system that are selectively responsive to this part of the back of your hand, and then there's another one that's responsive to this and so on. That's where the idea comes from. And so you can see that you can apply that basically to any sensory space. So it's skin surface um for sound stimuli, it's um the frequency content of a of a sound, so you can have, you, you find cells which are sensitive to high frequencies, other cells which are sensitive to low frequency. So that's a receptive field in the, in the sort of frequency space of sound. Um, the cells can also be sensitive to the spatial location of a sound, so we can. We can estimate the source of a sound by comparing the, um, the activation that we get in the right and the left ear. And there are cells which are selectively responding if a sound comes from here, but not from here, so. So yeah, so there are different sizes of receptive fields that's like the, the, the, in the somatosensory system, it's very easy to spot because you know that on your fingers, for instance, you have, you, you can, you can feel very fine textures very easily and so that means that receptive fields for the fingertips are actually very small um because you can, they allow you to sense um um fine detail. Um, there are very large receptive fields on, on your back, on, on the, in the skin on your, on your back. So if you ask your friends to put some fingers down on your back and ask, and, and, and, and your task is to count how many fingers there are, you probably can't do it because you haven't got enough resolution. So these are few cells with large receptive fields that don't give you that information. Um, so, yeah, so I, general idea is this idea of receptive fields, you can apply that everywhere in, in every sensory domain. So it's an important concept because that is the building block of, as we'll see how you can, you can then start to explore how a sensory system actually works and so by tomorrow afternoon. I'm finishing the part on vision. Um, what I'm hoping to be able to show you is how you can take that all the way to say, object recognition, those kind of things that we do, uh, uh, that, that we know the visual system is doing. So there's a summary here, you, you should just read that, so I'll, I'll move on to. Uh The lecture that I was actually planning for today. So what we're doing now is we're going, we're going one step further from the retina, and we're going to the, an brain area called the primary visual cortex, and that's actually where the kind of interesting stuff starts to happen. The retina is kind of very simple, right? It's interesting to see how it works, but you can't really do vision with that, so you need a bit more and the primary visual cortex gets more interesting. So we'll look at receptive fields in the primary visual cortex. We'll, um, we'll look at models. We, I, I'll introduce to you the concept of convolution because I think it's useful to know, um, and then we, we look at some cell types at the end. So just to, as a reminder, again, this picture, we've done the retina. We're gonna we're, we're gonna now travel along the, the optic nerve. The pathway the visual information travels, we're gonna kind of ignore the LGN. I'll say about that a few words about that again in the next slide and then we're moving to the back of the brain occipital lobe, um, to an area called V1. Um, anatomists are also not creative. They said that's the first stage of visual processing, so we name it visual one or whatever, right? So that's the, that's the place where the retinal information is sent to. And that's where this conscious vision really begins. So, um, the diagram here, which contains a bit of detail. The purpose of that is to show you the idea of those pathways that we've already touched on. So you might remember I'm, I told, told you about the ventral and the dorsal visual, visual pathway when we're looking at that more in, in the sort of global sense, right? The ventral pathway being responsible for object recognition and the dorsal pathway more like being responsible for motion, for where things are, that kind of separation functionally that I introduced to you. So you can, you can see that separation already when you look at the cells from the retina. There are actually more pathways than just those two. There's a parvocellular pathway that projects into the LGN and ignore those layers and so on. And then those parvos, this parvocellular pathway goes into a particular layer within the cortex, within the visual cortex. So remember here, the cortex has a layered structure. You can sort of anatomically define those layers, and it turns out that that structure has some function because different pathways terminate in different layers. So parvocellular pathway is the vent is is basically what gives rise to the ventral pathway. Receptive fields tend to be small in that pathway, uh, so this is the useful information for detecting what's going on in an image, what is in an image. And then we have a magnocellular pathway and that terminates mostly in a, in a slightly different layer in the visual cortex, and that's the starting point for the dorsal pathway. So these are larger receptive fields, they're more sensitive to motion, to changes, and so on. So that separation kind of continues as you go up along, along the visual pathways. So it's kind of, I mean, maybe, maybe as a, if, if you think about neural, deep neural networks and how they do vision. These networks don't really have pathways in that sense, right? And this is something that is set up during development of the brain before the brain really receives any visual information. So this is something that people might sometimes call an inductive bias that's in the system it's genetically encoded in some way. That that happens and that prestructures the brain quite a lot and our deep neural networks that we have that are very performant don't really do that and, and these pathways don't naturally emerge in these networks as well. So there's a, there's a big difference here between what the brain is doing and what the tech companies are training up to um to uh allow you to search images on. On, uh, on, on the search engine or to, um, find out what what's, what's in the images that you post on Facebook and Instagram and so on. So yeah, um Nevertheless, so let's look at what happens now in the visual cortex here. So we are, we're going down all that pathway. Spikes are going, coming into the visual cortex, and it's possible to do the same thing that we've done before, which is to take this is what physiologists do. They take an animal, they put an electrode in the location of interest, and then they start showing stimuli. And the most salient type of response that is observed in the primary visual cortex is illustrated here. So this is classic experiment. I'll show you in a minute a short movie of how these, these experiments actually look like, uh, these people who build a, uh, Hubel and Wiesel. They got the Nobel Prize for this work. They, um, they were actually, they knew the primary visual cortex was involved in vision, but they didn't know how. So they, they, they started recording from a cat and they showed it all sorts of things like objects and so on and they because they were just trying to work out what this is specifically that it's responding to and uh the, the legend has it that somehow by chance they were moving. Contours across the screen. It wasn't really an experiment and that's how they discovered that. I don't know if it's true, but sounds like a nice story how science, science is, this is sometimes done. Anyway, so here we have a, a white background. And a a dark bar and that dark bar is just moving in, has, has a particular orientation. So here as we go down here. Um, we, uh, the, the orientation of that bar is changing. And the bar's always moving perpendicular to its to to to the line where it's extended. So this bar would be moving up and down, and this bar would be moving side to side, forth and back and so on. And so what you can see quite easily is this is response from one cell, and you see that as we get present the binder, as the bars presented in a specific orientation here, this kind of oblique orientation. Then this neuron is firing and at orientations which are quite different from that one, from that 45 degree orientation, the cell is silent. And so we can plot this, um, this response pattern in, um, uh, in, in a, in a, in a curve here, um, where on the X axis, we have the orientation of this bar and on the Y axis we have some measure of the response. So maybe um the number of spikes per second that the cell is producing when you, when you show that stimulus, right? And so you see a a a smooth curve that changes smoothly as as the orientation of the bars changed, um, with a peak at this oblique orientation here. So this is the, the, the orientation that is most sensitive to is usually set to zero. Now this gives you a sensitivity profile of that cell now no longer in response, not in response to say illumination level or something like that, but actually something that is already a feature in an image which is an orientation. So that cell is sensitive to a particular orientation and it's possible to change orientations, but you can change other things as well. And construct curves like that where you, you essentially look at the response of the cell as a function of the, of, of the parameter that you're changing and all of these curves are are called tuning curves because they reflect the tuning of the cell to a particular uh um. Uh, variable, right? So I'm gonna go and show you a just I think that's, it's an interesting to do. So I'll, I have a movie here. So this is from the from those Nobel Prize winning experiments, and this was, uh, this is all handcrafted because that's what they did back in the day and hopefully the audio is working. Let's see. I know, um, to change that, yes. So because Back in the back when people did this they would connect the amplifier that was recording the neural signal to a loudspeaker and this is what you then hear so I remember when I started in neuroscience. I had a supervisor from a lab in the medicine, medical school, and he was doing the same thing still, even though that was all computerised at the time. So every time you hear a little tick, that's a spike in that recorded neuron. And so what you see on the screen is how a bar is moved across to different locations and then They would draw out the area where the cell is responsive so you see the pluses they correspond to the area that they've established the cell is responding to. There's nothing in in these, so that's uh. That's an area where the cell is actually silenced. So I, I, I move forward a little bit. You can, if you want, uh, the link is on the slides maybe you get. So what we're getting here now on the screen by following those um symbols is kind of the, uh, um, a map of the receptive field of that particular neuron and that's how they used to measure it. I think there are some orientation changes on there later as well. Yeah, so here we have. Here we have some Some different orientations. OK, so there's a whole set of these experiments. I just wanted to show you how that looks in practise, um. Lots of noise and basically those receptive fields are are constructed by ear in those days at least. OK, um. Right, let's go here. And So Now, what we now know is um That, um. Cells are responsive to orientations. Now, these are receptive fields which are mapped with a, with, with a, with a, with a different method to the one you just saw, which is just drawing out symbols on a screen, but they are, they are techniques that can be used to establish what a receptive field is. And so each of those squares here shows you a portion of visual space, so X and Y dimension. And the intensity level shows you how many spikes you get when you stimulate at that particular location. So the grey means that there's some medium level maintained discharge. At any of these places. Um, and, um, that cannot be really changed by, by putting a stimulus there. But here, you see a white area and that's the area, region of the receptive field where the cell can be excited. And then next to it is a black area that is where the cell will be inhibited if light is presented there. So that's um that's a little bit like a like the centres around receptive fields. So a centre surround receptive field in this view would look like a white um a a white circle in the centre and then a dark ring around it. That would, that's how it would look like. And those are these visual cortex cells which are orientation selective. So let's maybe focus on the, on the middle one. We can kind of already guess how they function. So we have an excitatory region here, which is an elongated, elongated region. And so what that means is that if you cover that region with a with a stimulus, you will get the strongest response out of the cell because you're maximally excited, right? So you have to best present this cell here with a bright bar of light at this location or You can go the opposite and you can make everything bright and put a dark bar here and that would also give you a strong response, right? So that would be the opposite effect. Now if you put a light bar here, then you would suppress the response. So showing the cell just a white screen will basically have the same effect as a centre surround receptor field. It would reduce the response a little bit over just stimulating the excitatory region. So it's, it's a similar, it's, it's the idea is the same. You have regions in space which excite or inhibit the cell and the this receptive field, if that is, um, if you, you for each of the pixels in the visual field, you can compute the response of the cell by multiplying the value of these receptive fields with the value with the value um. Say with the pixel intensity at each location in the visual field that would give you a prediction of the output of the cell. That's what convolutions do and I'll, I'll show you a bit more in detail how that works. So what we know from uh from um. From the visual cortex is that we have an even coverage of all possible orientations. So there are many of these cells and they cover all possible orientations and they cover different scales. So we have these very small receptive fields and you can, you can, you can understand how they pay attention to mostly small changes or small, small structures in, in images, right? And then we've got these ones here which have larger receptive fields, so they're best excited if there are large scale structures in an image. So it's a little bit like taking the image and splitting it up into many, into all of these different, different uh uh channels here um and representing it, re-representing the image in that way. Here's, here's, here's, here's just an illustration of what happens if you have um small and large receptive fields. So this hasn't got anything to do with orientation selectivity, but just again to, to show you what, what, um, what the effect is of, of, of different receptive field sizes. So this is the original image here in A. Uh, so you get two pieces of information and one is hidden in, in small detail and one is very big, right? So if we take a large receptive field. We will remove all the detail and we would just see the no. And equally if it takes small receptive fields that isn't really sensitive to the large spatial scales and so the no would be removed and we see the yes. So that's that's how these kind of spatial scales work. Um, interesting detail. I, I think it's, it's at least interesting to mention. Um, is that the orientation selectivity of cells in many mammals, but not all of them. Is actually very nicely spatially organised, so let's focus on the image here on the right. Um, this is the cortical surface, and there are a few cells which are illus which are put in here so you can, you can see individual neurons, but this is, this is the surface of the cortex and the colours represent the most sensitive orientation at each location in uh uh in the cortex. So there are many cells that we would be looking at here. There are many cells that just a few shown. And um as you can see, um, if we move across the cortex like this, maybe just horizontally, then the preferred orientation of the cells that are sitting at each location changes quite smoothly, right? So in each of these patches, we have a full set of all possible orientations and those orientations um change smoothly. And then we have, you can see that on the left better, we have these contact points here in the middle, they're called pinwheels where all orientation orientations meet. Um, so this is A way of rep uh this is a way that in, in the brain we find quite often this is uh, is to do with uh topology and topological mappings. So remember that on the visual cortex, we have this written topic map, which means that neighbouring places on the cortex correspond to neighbouring places in the visual field. Now, if you wanna cover um not just the spatial dimension but maybe other dimensions such as orientation or maybe colour or something like that, right? You have to sort of squeeze it into that and that seems to be the way this is done in the brain. It's done in a in a spatially organised way where multiple quantities that these cells are sensitive to are all put into these kind of maps. So it's not just space that's spatially represented but also other quantities such as orientation. Again, that is something that deep neural networks don't really pay attention to, but it seems very important in in the cortex because if that's disrupted, then vision is, is can be, can be um can be seriously disrupted. Interestingly, many rodents don't have that. They have a random organisation of, of, of receptive fields. People say maybe mice don't use their visual system that much. Maybe that's the reason. So it's a bit of a mystery, but there are differences there as well. Um, OK, um, so let's, let's get to models then. Um, I've kind of tried to imply to you already how a model of, um, a, uh, orientation selective cell would look like. By the way, these cells, um, that we're looking at here are called simple cells. Again, the physiologists are so creative and because they found a cell that was more complicated, so this is a simple cell. In a bit we hear about complex cells because obviously that's, that's what they found anyway. These are called simple cells everywhere um. When you look at the receptive field, and when you remember what I just told you about lateral inhibition and the sort of convergence of uh information. Um, then you can see that these regions on in the, in the visual space that reps that can excite or inhibit a cell might just be represented by converging inputs with the correct sign, and that's exactly what happens. So in a first approximation, at least we can say that the centre of a receptive field this one here. Comes from excitatory cells which represent that particular place in the image, so they would be, um, they might be on retinal ganglion cells which are with the receptive fields that are aligned with the preferred orientation in a particular location, right? All these are exciting the, the, the, the simple cell that encodes that orientation. And then we have more cells in the surround here, which are sensitive to different locations and those will inhibit the cell and that's how you can, it, it might be an off cell here you can do it by an off cell or you can do it by by inhibit bilateral inhibition. There are different, different ways that can be done. But essentially that that's the way this works. So it's really about um. The convergence of, of the information, the, the spatially selective convergence of the information onto a cell and how what what then happens is all the spikes are coming in, they added up, and they determine then basically the, the output of the cell, right? So that's, that's how you can construct. Um, sell and, and when people realised this, so this is a schematic which was developed by Hubel and Wiesel, um, who found this, um, and the idea was, OK, we can, we can take that forward now. We can maybe, um, we can, we can go to the next level in the visual system and maybe start putting objects together or, or we can connect contours together because objects. Of course, uh objects are constructed out of, out of connected, contours, for instance, right? So there was an idea that that's how the visual system is solving things. Uh, I'll talk about that more tomorrow about those ideas, and the idea isn't wrong, but of course it's more complicated than that. So Now, how to model that so on the algorithmic level, it's possible to write down a very simple model which essentially replicates that that receptive field and this is a function down here which is called a Gor function or a Gaba wavelet. If anybody's from engineering, I don't know, you might hear, have heard or hear about this. It's a common, it's, it's, it's a common um way of, of filtering information. Uh, it's basically a Bundas philtre with some added, added selectivity to it. So the, the way this is constructed is You start with a cosine function, and what matters is that a cosine function just goes up and down, right? So this way you can model areas, parts of the receptive fields, which are either positive, excitatory or inhibitory negative, right? So you can just use a cosine wave for that. That's an easy way to do it. But then a cosine wave goes from minus infinity to infinity, so that's not good. So what we do then to restrict the receptive field spatially is we multiply that with a Gaussian envelope. So the Gaussian curve, the bell curve, that limits basically how far that receptive field goes, and the parameters here, so the omega, that's the frequency of the cosine, the sigma here is the size of the receptive field, and the two multiplied together. Gives you, give you a shape like this. The theta here is the angle. So if you change that in space, you, you change the angle, uh, the, the, the neuron is selective to. So that's a super simple sort of algorithmic model for um. For for these simple cells and in fact that's a model that before deep networks were really used in computer vision, this was one of the first stages that people would apply to an image because it gives information about structure, about contours. It can be used to build up contours. So this is, this is a part of a feature set that computer vision used extensively no longer because now neural nets can do everything. Um, OK, um. So, so that's yeah, that, that this this model here would be the implementational if you, if you, if you wrote a simulation of this model here that would be essentially be the implementation of, of something like this, right? Um, now, I wanna try and introduce convolutions a little bit because I think it's a, it's a, it's just a useful concept to be aware of in, especially in computer vision, uh, convolutional networks are very important. Um, the idea is that, so maybe I'm gonna start with um these pictures here and then we go to the formula. So the idea is we have a set of orientation selective uh receptive fields at every location in space. So every location in space is covered by a set of cells which are all selective to different orientations, right? And then in an approximation, maybe just in the centre, centre of the visual field, we have many, many of these pixels which are essentially covered by the same types of receptive fields, right? So, So What we want to do now is, is the goal is we wanna see what these receptive fields, yeah, we wanna learn about the output that these receptive fields predict when we show them an image, right? And so what we want to know is what is the output image that we're getting when we're passing an input through those receptive fields, right? And so we have to do that for every pixel. And this is what we're doing here. So here we have a 5x5 input pattern and we have a um uh 3 by 3 set of cells, right? So we're starting with this first cell and we say this cell has a receptive field which is centred here. So first of all, well, we, we, we only have 5x5 image, image uh uh uh pixels. So we're adding some empty pixels here, um, to Uh, have a constant size receptive field and so we're saying this cell here integrates over 3 by 3 pixels. That's the size of the receptive field and the weights that are connecting each of the pixels to the cell, that's, that's essentially those plots I showed you of receptive fields. So what we're doing here now to compute the prediction of what the cell would respond to is where we are. We are waiting all these pixels here by the value that the receptive field tells us, and then we're summing them together, and that's the activity of this cell. Then we move on. We may, we move by two steps in this example here. So now we have the second cell, that cell is sensitive, most is centred around this position in space here, right? I'm doing the same thing. And, and crucially, we're using the same receptive field so we only need one receptive field and we're applying this to all locations. So we're going on, doing this, and we're going here. So now we're centering it here on the image, we're going in two steps, pix pixel steps that's called in, in the neural network language that's called a stride of 2. If you ever encounter that, then we go here, we go 2 further. Now we have this centre cell here sensitive to the centre of the visual input and so on. So that's how a convolution works and the mathematical operations. So if you ever see that, it's, it's, it's, it's usually denoted by the star. So you have a convolution is a mathematical operation. Which does what I just described to you to functions and we're doing it here to uh to images and receptive fields. So we have a function, a first function here, a first set of points, let's say, is F the image, and then we have G, that's the receptive field and often that's called a kernel. Um, it's the same thing basically. So in, in just, just terminology, different. So we got these defined on in this case on a set of integers because they're all discrete, right? There there's not not a continuous space here we have a pixel space so it's all discrete. And um what we're doing is to predict now how the image would look like if it's kind of passed through the receptive field at location N. So I've, I've written it down here in one dimension only, but you can easily extend that to two dimension. It just becomes difficult to read. So let's say pixel N like pixel pixel number 10, how does our, how does the output look like for a neuron that's centred at pixel 10? So then we go from essentially uh from. We, we started, we, we, we, we centre at, at, at pixel number 10. Then we go to the left, we start somewhere at the left. That's the size of the receptive field, how big we define it, and we go pixel by pixel and multiply. For every of these pixels, we multiply that with the value in the receptive field or the kernel. We collect all this, so this is this multiplication here. We're going step by step. And then we're summing them all together and that's that that's producing the output then and so that's a convolution in 1D and you can extend that quite easily as I showed you to 2D if you, I don't know if yeah I think if so that there might be apps on the phone where you can take an image and make something look all contoury or something like that. These, these, these apps are using convolutions with certain types of philtres that give you the desired effect or if you wanna blur, you know, that's a Gaussian function that has, has a, has a wide receptive field you pass that image through that and, and you get out a blurred version of it. So I've shown you those kind of examples last time. That's how receptive fields really can be modelled and how we can unders we can understand how they function. Are there any questions about this? Um. I, I, as I said, I think I, I put it in. I mean, I could have left it out because it's not crucial really, but I think it's a useful concept to know because it will, it, it might appear later again if you are planning to do any kind of AI machine learning, you need to know that anyway, so you might as well know it now. That's, that's the idea behind it. Um, if, if you wanna sort of understand it, if you think it's interesting and you have a question, uh, put it up on Piazza please. Um, happy to try and. Help you with that. Good. OK, that was dry. So, uh, let's get to an example. Um, I'm, I took this from Wiki Wikipedia and I'm, I'm told that means confusion, is that right? Is anybody here? Read Chinese. I don't know. OK. Is that true? OK. Um, OK, so here's the original image. Now, the image, this image is put through Gabos with different orientations, OK? And you can kind of guess that that's a Gabo philtre which is selective for vertical orientations. So that's what we're getting out. Here's one that's selective for horizontal orientations, and then here we've got oblique orientations. So literally, the images that come into our head, through our eyes, and in the visual cortex, they sort of, when you look at this. What's happening in your brain is the image gets split up like this, like you see here. That's, that's literally what's happening. Now if you take those um and add them together, you get the original image again. It is blurred. Because the receptive field have some spatial extent. So in, in sort of signal processing engineering speak, you would say, there's some low pass filtering going on. There's the high frequencies in the image are removed because of the spatial extent of those philtres. So you, you're actually losing some detail here. It's a blurred version of this, but it's a real representation in terms of different orientations and as I was trying to sort of lead you towards the idea that you can actually use that in. In productive ways to learn something about objects, that's, that's the idea behind it. So, um, simple cells, well, simple cells have this, um, have sens are sensitive to, uh, OK, let's go here, uh. So this cell, if this is visual space here, this cell will only respond if we're showing the sort of oblique bar along this orientation at this location. If we move that slightly to the right, the cell will not respond and probably another one will respond, right? Now, if you think about vision, um. There's, there's a big problem which is, which, which compu computer vision people have been struggling with a lot which is called uh the um which, which is related to invariances. So essentially if you, if you, if you know about an object. You would like to be able to detect it anywhere in the visual field, right? And you wanna detect it maybe under rotations as well, right? Not just in upright position. So this is what meant by invariances, um, so certain, certain changes of an image or part of an image you wanna be robust against because the object doesn't change, it's just it's appearance changes, right? Now. Simple cells, these orientation selective simple cells, they don't have any, they they cannot account for any of these invariances. So if you ask a simple cell where was there an oblique orientation at 45 degrees, it can only tell you if it was in a particular location within its receptive field, right? Um You can ask, go and ask multiple simple cells if there was a 45 degree orientation somewhere, and that gives you more information because then you, you, one might say, oh, yes, there was something. Um, because it happened to be exactly in the right place for the receptive fields where the other, others would say no. So you can pull simple cells together to ask a little bit more complicated question like is there a 45 degree orientation somewhere in the image, right? Then you discard the information of where it is you're just asking was there this orientation? And this is a little bit like asking, is there, is there a student in this room, right? Um, so. Uh, so I don't care where and so on and how many, I just wanna get that information. That's, that's the sort of question you're answering, you're asking these cells, and it turns out that this is happening in the visual cortex in. What The physiologist called complex cells. Complex cells are telling you whether there was a a particular orientation present within still a limited spatial domain, so a receptive field, but no longer, it doesn't no longer matter where exactly it was. It just tells you, OK, there was this orientation was present somewhere. Um, so this cell will respond no matter where in the receptive field that orientation is shown, and it will not respond if any other orientation is shown. And this is achieved again in our first approximation, but simple sort of model that we can have for that is that we take a bunch of simple cells which have different spatial loca which are selective to, to, to different spatial locations and pull them together. There's actually a squaring operation in there as well, but never mind that. And that leads to a complex cell which now has this response characteristic. So that's, it's a tiny, tiny step. I mean, it, it doesn't get you to knowing whether there's a student in this room, but at least it gets, it, it gets you one step ahead. That's the way you can try and think about it, about the visual system. So we're getting, we, we, we, we, the, the brain uses these kind of small steps to extract. Information that's useful for then the next step and then the next step and ultimately we, we get to finding an object. So this is about, about, about invariances in images and invariances, as I said, um. Uh, one that is really hard, was hard to deal with in computer vision was just rotation, right? You train, you, you have a fantastic, um, I don't know, teacup detector, and you've, you've, you've sort of made it work on teacups which are standing on a table and have been photographed like this. Um, that teacup detector will fail if the teacup suddenly is dropped to its side because it isn't rotation invariant, and that's what the brain is really good at. Um, not perfect, by the way, so there's a, there's a famous illusion when you turn faces upside down, um, you, you, you, you, you will fail to see facial expressions in the upside down face. Um, there's maybe I should actually add that tomorrow. Right, um, complex cells, uh, So you can use a, a sort of model of a receptive um field of a complex cell to, this is meant to illustrate that you can actually use that now to find outlines in a sim simple cell type. So each of the complex cells still has a spatially restricted receptive field, but it tells you what is the orientation that's present and you can start that as um. Uh, to, to make up outlines of objects in images. Um, so here's just an illustration of how an image would look like all the way to complex cells. So this is the original image here. Here we have the retina or LGN. We have these contour sensitive cells and orientations encoded. Now here we have the visual cortex and we're we're looking at a horizontal orientation selective cell. That's how that breaks down and then a complex cell has no longer got these. These dark and it, it loses the information about which direction, um, whether you're going from from bright to dark or from dark to bright. Losing the information where exactly in the receptive field the the change was you're basically, when you're looking at this, you know there was a horizontal contour here, OK, and that's that's that's, that's, that's, that's useful information because you can start putting putting objects together that way. Yeah, so, OK, 2 minutes for questions. If there's anything you can think of. Urgently Yeah, go ahead, uh, you know how you said

SPEAKER 2
like, um, faces like that upside down. Is that like you could we have like an inductive bias like genetically for faces. I think I read that even like babies would do.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah. So there's a part of the IT cortex that is specifically selective to faces we know that. I think We just don't encounter upside down faces very much that want to communicate with us, so I, I think that might be an. So the fact that these face sensitive areas exist and they exist early in life, that suggests that's an inbuilt bias and a a a sort of um. Almost on a level genetically encoded bias for the system that is probably very useful for for survival, um, and, um, starting from there you would start using that system that helps you with faces to for instance, use it for reading facial expressions for communication and so on. And I, what, what I suspect is that we mostly encounter horizontal faces, uh, and so the system is just learning how to deal with those and the upside down because facial expression uh can be quite subtle and, and uh not, not trivial to read, right? So, um, there's a lot of features that go into reading facial expressions. So I would imagine you could train yourself to. To read facial expression of an upside down upside down face, but we just encounter it, don't encounter it much, and that's why, why, why we can't do it very well, yeah. You had a question. I was going to ask, you mentioned like this.

SPEAKER 3
function is it, is this the first part of is this will be the first part of image recognition process or that's different function because like I'm guessing you will. Take an image and with this function create a factor. Yeah, so I mean in uh, are you thinking about

SPEAKER 1
a neural network or um. What, what kind of. Yeah, so I mean, really what a convolutional neural network does is it learns a set of philtres. And those philtres are informed by um they they're learned from features in the images basically and then you go like you don't need a separate philtre for every location you can just reuse the same philtre for the whole image, right? So the computer vision people before deep networks, they would use, they would work a lot on trying to find good receptive fields that they could use um to convert the images with that would give them informative uh representations of an image, right? And so yeah, what you're getting out is you you're putting in the pixels that's the raw image you're putting a convolution through um. You get an output vector and that vector might contain a representation of an image that is more amenable to then, for example, um, a method for classifying image content, right? So that's kind of how you can think about it. Um, often these kind of philtres are repeated then, so you, you start with the orientations. You have a bank of philtres that give you different orientations. You convert the image with all of these. You get, you get a big matrix of outputs that is now essentially that here, right? So it's something like that. And then you do this, you, you repeat that step again, but maybe the receptive fields are more sophisticated. Maybe they're looking for continuous contours now. So I'm gonna try and show that next time. The the convolution is really just a way of applying the same philtre to every location. Because that's um that's what makes sense because in an image anything could happen anywhere, right? So there's that's does that answer the question a little bit I hope we can. Right? Good, um, all right. See you tomorrow.
